        Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
Class Environmental Assessment Study


                      City of Toronto



                           May 2010
                                   TABLE OF CONTENTS


1.0   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
          Staff Report ­ dated January 20, 2010..................................................... 1
          Public Works & Infrastructure Committee Decision ­ dated February 2, 2010.. 22
          Staff Report ­ dated February 19, 2010................................................. 25
          City Council Decision ­ dated February 22 and 23, 2010........................... 30

2.0   BACKGROUND................................................................................. 33
      2.1 Study Area Location..................................................................... 33

      2.2     Purpose and Objectives of the Study................................................... 34

3.0   PROJECT APPROACH........................................................................ 35
      3.1  Municipal Class Environmental Assessment Process............................... 35

      3.2     Purpose of Project File................................................................... 35
              3.2.1 Part II Order...................................................................... 36

      3.3     Technical Working Group............................................................... 36

      3.4     Public and Regulatory Agency Consultation..........................................             37
              3.4.1 General............................................................................       37
              3.4.2 Summary of Public Consultation Process....................................                37
                     3.4.2.1 Notice of Commencement and Public Open House #1...........                       37
                     3.4.2.2 Study Project Website................................................            38
                     3.4.2.3 Public Open House #1................................................             38
                     3.4.2.4 Public Open House #2................................................             38
              3.4.3 Agency Consultation....................................................................   39
              3.4.4 Business Improvement Area (BIA) and Ratepayer Groups.....................                 40

4.0   PROBLEM / OPPORTUNITY STATEMENT............................................ 41

5.0   INVENTORY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS............................................. 43
      5.1  Natural Environment..................................................................... 43
           5.1.1 Vegetation......................................................................... 43
           5.1.2 Wildlife............................................................................ 43
           5.1.3 Water Course / Drainage....................................................... 43

      5.2     Socio-Economic Environment.......................................................... 43

      5.3     Physical Infrastructure.................................................................... 44
              5.3.1 Pavement Condition............................................................. 44
              5.3.2 Sidewalk Condition.............................................................. 44
      5.4    Transportation / General Traffic........................................................    44
             5.4.1 Designation and Network Significance.......................................           44
             5.4.2 Road Configuration.............................................................       45
             5.4.3 Parking............................................................................   45
             5.4.4 Traffic Control Devices.........................................................      45
             5.4.5 Public Transit Service...........................................................     45
             5.4.6 Traffic Operations...............................................................     46
             5.4.7 Existing Pedestrian Conditions................................................        46
             5.4.8 Cyclist Traffic Conditions within the Study Area...........................           46

      5.5    Archaeology and Built Heritage........................................................ 46

6.0   ALTERNATIVE SOLUTIONS AND EVALUATION................................... 47

      6.1    Identification of Alternative Solutions................................................. 47

      6.2    Evaluation Criteria for Alternative Solutions......................................... 48

7.0   CONCERNS RAISED........................................................................... 49

8.0   REFINED RECOMMENDED SOLUTION................................................ 53

9.0   POTENTIAL IMPACTS DURING CONSTRUCTION, MITIGATION and
      FUTURE COMMITMENTS................................................................... 54

APPENDICES

Appendix A Municipal Class EA Process

Appendix B Notice of Study Commencement & Public Open House #1 and Newspaper
           Advertisements

Appendix C Public Open House #1 and Summary of Comments

Appendix D    Public Open House #2 and Summary of Comments

Appendix E Agency Consultation

Appendix F Land Use Designations

Appendix G Parking Demand Survey

Appendix H Existing Traffic Volumes

Appendix I   Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report
Appendix J   Alternatives Developed

Appendix K Evaluation Table

Appendix L Refined Preferred Solution

Appendix M Recommended Solution

Appendix N Refined Recommended Solution
1.0        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                 STAFF REPORT
                                                 ACTION REQUIRED

Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
Class Environmental Assessment Study

   Date:         January 20, 2010

   To:           Public Works and Infrastructure Committee

   From:         General Manager, Transportation Services

   Wards:        Ward 18 ­ Davenport

   Reference
             p:\2010\ClusterB\tra\tim\pw10001.tim
   Number:

SUMMARY

A Class Environmental Assessment Study was undertaken to review the feasibility of widening
the sidewalk/boulevard to enhance the streetscape of Peel Avenue and a portion of Gladstone
Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, by narrowing the existing pavement
width. Currently, these roadways operate two-way and accommodate through traffic diverted
from Dufferin Street due to the discontinuity of Dufferin Street between Peel Avenue and Queen
Street West. As a result of the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project, Peel Avenue and
Gladstone Avenue will no longer need to accommodate through traffic from Dufferin Street and
the resulting decrease in traffic volumes on these roads has enabled consideration of a reduction
in the pavement width. The evaluation of a reasonable range of alternative solutions, which
included consultation with the public and review agencies, resulted in the following Preferred
Design:

           The narrowing of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and the
           supermarket driveway (Price Chopper located at No. 22 Northcote Avenue), from 13.1
           metres to approximately 8.6 metres to include the following features:

                  Single northbound lane on Gladstone Avenue (one-way operation);
                  Single westbound lane on Peel Avenue (one-way operation);
                  Parallel parking provided on both sides of roadway, increasing the total on-street
                  parking supply from approximately 28 to 30 spaces;
                  Sidewalk/boulevard width of approximately 5.7 metres on each side of Peel and
                  Gladstone Avenues; and


Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                     1
                                                                                                       1
               Double row of trees provided where possible (subject to utility locations and
               detailed design).
Subsequently, Fire Services confirmed their requirement for a minimum 6.0-metre pavement
width in accordance with the requirements of the Building Code and to satisfy their operational
needs. In order to achieve this requirement while maintaining, to the greatest extent possible, the
other objectives of this initiative, the preferred design was further refined, as follows, resulting in
the Recommended Solution:

               The removal of approximately seven parking spaces on Gladstone Avenue;

               The reduction in the width of the boulevard on the east side of Gladstone Avenue,
               between Peel Avenue and approximately 10.0 metres south thereof, by
               approximately 1.8 metres; and

               The reduction in the width of the boulevard on the west side of Gladstone
               Avenue, between Premises Nos. 8 and 20 Gladstone Avenue, by approximately
               1.8 metres.

A Notice of Study Completion reflecting this revised design must now be issued and the Project
File placed in the public record for a 30-day review period in accordance with the requirements
of the Municipal Class Environmental Assessment.



RECOMMENDATIONS

The General Manager, Transportation Services recommends that:

1.   That the preferred design be modified to address the requirements of the Fire Services
       Division by:

               The removal of approximately seven parking spaces on Gladstone Avenue;

               The reduction in the width of the boulevard on the east side of Gladstone Avenue,
               between Peel Avenue and approximately 10.0 metres south thereof, by
               approximately 1.8 metres; and

               The reduction in the width of the boulevard on the west side of Gladstone
               Avenue, between Premises Nos. 8 and 20 Gladstone Avenue, by approximately
               1.8 metres.

2.   Authority be granted to the General Manager of Transportation Services to issue a Notice of
       Study Completion and to file the Project File for the Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class
       Environmental Assessment Study in the public record for 30-days in accordance with the
       requirements of the Municipal Class Environmental Assessment.




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                       2
                                                                                                          2
3.   Staff report back to the Public Works and Infrastructure Committee, after the 30-day review
       period, on the feasibility and implications of any proposed alteration to the
       Recommended Design.

4.   Appropriate City officials be authorized and directed to take the necessary action to give
       effect thereto.

Financial Impact

The estimated cost of the road modifications required to narrow Peel Avenue and a portion of
Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West is approximately $270,000.
This work is planned to be undertaken in 2010 in conjunction with water and road reconstruction
work that has already been identified in the Capital Works Program for 2010 and includes Peel
Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West.

The total project costs of approximately $1,020,000 for the preferred design (Alternative 4) are
included in the 2010 Transportation Capital Program List 'B' Priority Projects. This project
may be substituted in-year, in place of Approved 2010 Capital Program projects based on
funding surplus, funding re-allocations, or approved projects conflicts. Where a funding re-
allocation is required Council Authority is necessary. The actual work date is subject to City
priorities and coordination of work.

The Deputy City Manager and Chief Financial Officer has reviewed this report and agree with
the financial impact information.

ISSUE BACKGROUND

Peel Avenue and the southern portion of Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen
Street West, are minor arterial roadways that accommodate through traffic diverted from
Dufferin Street due to the discontinuity of Dufferin Street, between Peel Avenue and Queen
Street West. The Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project will provide continuity on Dufferin
Street, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West. Construction began in the fall 2008 and is
expected to be complete in the summer 2010. Due to the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project,
Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue will no longer need to accommodate through traffic from
Dufferin Street and traffic volumes on these roads will decrease.

Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are scheduled to be reconstructed in 2010 as part of the
Capital Works Program. In addition, construction of the Sudbury Street Extension project began
in the fall 2008 and involves the extension of Sudbury Street to Queen Street West, opposite
Gladstone Avenue. As such, Sudbury Street will form the fourth leg of the signalized intersection
of Queen Street West and Gladstone Avenue. The anticipated completion time for the Sudbury
Street Extension is late 2010.




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                   3
                                                                                                    3
Due to the transformation of the road network in this area and the need to reconstruct Peel
Avenue and Gladstone Avenue in the near future, there is an opportunity to change the design
and configuration of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue to reflect future conditions and satisfy
stated objectives.

Based on the above, Transportation Services initiated an Environmental Assessment study to
review the feasibility of changing the design on Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue and evaluate
alternative methods to address these needs.


COMMENTS

Study Process

A Class Environmental Assessment (EA) Study was initiated for Peel Avenue and Gladstone
Avenue, to review the feasibility of changing the design of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue
and to evaluate alternative methods to address future conditions. The Peel-Gladstone
Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study has been completed in accordance with
the requirements for a Schedule `B' project under the Municipal Class Environmental
Assessment (the Class EA). The Class EA process requires that the City confirm the need (i.e.
define the problem/opportunity), identify feasible solutions, evaluate the impact of the alternative
solutions on the natural, social and economic environments, and select a preferred alternative for
construction.

As a requirement of Schedule `B' projects, if City Council endorses the recommendations of this
Study, the Project File will be filed in the public record for a minimum 30-day review period.
During this period, members of the public, and any other interested individual, interest group, or
government agency, may request that a Part II Order be issued by the Minister of the
Environment. If granted, a Part II Order elevates the status of the project from a Class EA Study
to an Individual Environmental Assessment. If this occurs, the project cannot proceed until the
proponent completes an Individual Environmental Assessment Study and receives approval from
the Minister. If a Part II Order is not granted or if no requests or objections are received during
the filing period, the project is considered approved under the Environmental Assessment Act
and may proceed.

The Class EA Study was carried out with the assistance of a Technical Advisory Committee
comprised of staff from Transportation Services, Technical Services, City Planning, Toronto
Parking Authority, Toronto Water, and Parks, Forestry & Recreation.

Public Consultation

Public involvement is an integral and ongoing part of the study process for the Peel-Gladstone
Reconstruction Class EA Study. The public consultation requirements of the Class EA were met
and surpassed. A Notice of Study Commencement and Public Open House (POH) was advertised
in the May 14 and 21, 2009 editions of NOW Magazine and the May 15 and 22, 2009 editions of
the Parkdale Liberty newspaper. This notice announced the initiation of the Class EA Study and


Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                    4
                                                                                                       4
invited interested stakeholders to participate at the first POH, which was held on May 26, 2009
to present the study background, list the alternative solutions, outline the evaluation criteria, and
identify the next steps of the study.

Through Canada Post, notices were also directly mailed to relevant review agencies and resident
stakeholder groups, and were distributed to approximately 9,800 residents and businesses within
the study area.

A list of the relevant review agencies that were contacted is shown in Attachment 1 of this
report. In addition, letters were issued to the following aboriginal contacts to notify them of the
project:

               Indian and North Affairs Canada
               Ontario Ministry of Aboriginal Affairs
               Mississauga's of the New Credit First Nation

Thirty members of the public signed in at the meeting and nine comment sheets were received.

Of the comment sheets received, two residents preferred that Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue
remain in their current condition. None of the residents commenting supported angle parking and
half of the residents who responded were in favour of converting Peel Avenue and Gladstone
Avenue into one-way streets while the other half were opposed.

Based on the comment sheets received, the following list indicates the level of importance for the
uses and features of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue:

       1.      Green Space
       2.      Pedestrian
       3.      Street Furniture
       4.      Cycling
       5.      Automobile
       6.      Parking

Although parking was viewed as least important to those who submitted comment sheets, the
local Councillor's office has received some requests by local residents and many requests by
business owners for additional parking spaces in the study area.

The evaluation of alternative solutions for the design of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue was
presented at the second POH, which was held on November 16, 2009. Notices appeared in the
November 12, 2009 edition of NOW Magazine and the November 13, 2009 edition of the
Parkdale Liberty newspaper. Notices were also mailed to interested external agencies, interest
groups, and approximately 9,800 residents and businesses within the study area via Canada Post.
Thirty-four members of the public signed in and 14 comment sheets were received.




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                      5
                                                                                                        5
Of those who commented on the Preferred Solution, all were in support of it with the exception
of one resident who was opposed. One resident agreed with the Preferred Solution for Gladstone
Avenue but not for Peel Avenue.

Environmental Assessment Findings

(1)    Identification of the Problem or Opportunity

The study area, which is illustrated in Attachment 2 of this report, is bounded by Dundas Street
West to the north, Dovercourt Road to the east, Sudbury Street to the southeast, King Street West
to the south, the C.N.R. / C.P.R. tracks to the southwest and Brock Avenue to the west. Peel
Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are currently classified as minor arterial roadways with
approximately 12,000 vehicles daily and a speed limit of 50 km/h. For both roadways, the
pavement width is approximately 13.1 metres, sidewalks are provided on both sides and TTC
service is provided by the 29 Dufferin bus route. Currently, these roadways accommodate
through traffic from Dufferin Street due to the discontinuity of Dufferin Street between Peel
Avenue and Queen Street West.

Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are four lane roadways. On the north side of Peel Avenue,
parking is prohibited from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday to Friday and permit parking is
permitted from 12:01 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Regular parking is permitted at all other times. On the
south side of Peel Avenue, parking is prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., Monday to Friday
and permit parking is permitted from 12:01 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Regular parking is permitted at all
other times.

On the east side of Gladstone Avenue, stopping is prohibited from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
Monday to Friday and parking is prohibited at all times. On the west side of Gladstone Avenue,
parking is prohibited at all times from Peel Avenue to approximately 15 metres south thereof.
From approximately 15 metres south of Peel Avenue to approximately 60 metres north of Queen
Street West, stopping is prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
Monday to Friday and parking is permitted at all other times. From approximately 60 metres
north of Queen Street West to Queen Street West, stopping is prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and from 4:00 p.m., Monday to Friday and standing is prohibited at all times.

There are traffic control signals at the intersection of Queen Street West and Gladstone Avenue.
The intersection of Dufferin Street and Peel Avenue is stop-controlled for westbound traffic on
Peel Avenue and the intersection of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue is stop-controlled for
southbound traffic on Gladstone Avenue.

The analysis of existing and future conditions on Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, identified
the opportunity to consider transportation improvements, as described in the following points:

·      Peel Avenue and the portion of Gladstone Avenue between Peel Avenue and Queen
       Street West, are currently designed to accommodate through traffic, including TTC buses
       from Dufferin Street;




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                  6
                                                                                                    6
·      The Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project will provide continuity on Dufferin Street,
       between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West. Construction began in the Fall 2008 and is
       expected to be complete in June 2010;

·      Due to the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue
       will no longer need to accommodate through traffic from Dufferin Street and traffic
       volumes on these roads are expected to decrease;

·      Due to the expected decrease in traffic volumes, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue
       could be converted and re-classified from minor arterial roadways to local roadways;

·      Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are scheduled to be reconstructed in 2010 as part of
       the Capital Works Program;

·      A cyclist/pedestrian trail is being considered along the CN/CP Railway corridor with
       potential connections to/from Dufferin Street;

·      Construction of the Sudbury Street Extension project began in the fall 2008 and involves
       the extension of Sudbury Street to Queen Street West, opposite Gladstone Avenue. As
       such, Sudbury Street will form the fourth leg of the intersection with traffic control
       signals at Queen Street West and Gladstone Avenue. The anticipated completion time for
       the Sudbury Street Extension is late 2010;

·      A parking demand survey indicates that although the demand for parking on Peel Avenue
       is not high, parking on Gladstone Avenue is being fully utilized, particularly during the
       afternoon off-peak period (see Attachment 3 of this report, which summarizes the results
       of the parking demand survey);

·      The City has received several development applications for the area surrounding Peel
       Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, particularly in the West Queen West triangle. One of the
       approved developments is located on the northwest corner of Queen Street West and
       Gladstone Avenue (No. 2 Gladstone Avenue). This development includes an eight-storey
       mixed use (residential/commercial) building. As part of the approval, the developer is
       required to provide streetscape features on Gladstone Avenue, adjacent to this property;

·      With increased development in this area, there will likely be an increase in demand for
       parking spaces. This could be achieved through the redesign of Peel Avenue and
       Gladstone Avenue;

·      The planned reconstruction of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue provides an
       opportunity to improve the public realm (i.e. streetscaping and street furniture); and

·      Based on the above, there is an opportunity to review the feasibility of changing the
       design of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue and evaluate alternative methods to
       address this.




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                   7
                                                                                                   7
(2)    Identification and Evaluation of Alternative Solutions

To address the opportunity described above, five alternative solutions, including "Do Nothing,"
were generated and evaluated. A brief description of these alternatives and the results of the
evaluation are provided below.

Alternative 1 (Do Nothing): The "Do Nothing" alternative was included as a benchmark for the
assessment of the other planning alternatives. In this instance, the "Do Nothing" alternative
involves reconstructing the existing roadway cross-section width of approximately 13.1 metres,
as scheduled in the 2010 Capital Works Program, with no additional improvements and/or
modifications.

Alternative 2: Narrowing the roadway by approximately 2.1 metres and providing a single lane
in each direction of travel with parallel parking on both sides of the roadway. Single row of trees
would be provided on each side of the roadway.

Alternative 3: Narrowing the roadway by approximately 4.3 metres and providing a single lane
in each direction of travel with parallel parking on one side only. Double row of trees would be
provided where possible (subject to utility locations and detailed design).

Alternative 4: Narrowing the roadway by approximately 4.5 metres and converting Gladstone
Avenue and Peel Avenue to operate one-way in the northbound and westbound directions,
respectively and providing parallel parking on both sides of the roadway. Double row of trees
would be provided where possible (subject to utility locations and detailed design).

Alternative 5: Narrowing the roadway by approximately 3.7 metres and converting Gladstone
Avenue and Peel Avenue to operate one-way in the northbound and westbound directions,
respectively, and providing angle parking. Single row of trees would be provided on each side of
the roadway.

A summary of the approximate number of parking spaces that would be provided for each
alternative is shown in Attachment 4 of this report. A summary of the approximate width of
sidewalk/boulevard space provided for each alternative is shown in Attachment 5.

With the exception of Alternative 1 ("Do Nothing"), all of the alternatives developed include the
same roadway configuration on Gladstone Avenue, between the Price Chopper Driveway and
Queen Street West. This includes the following common elements:

·      A roadway cross-section of approximately 8.6 metres;
·      One northbound lane and one southbound lane;
·      Parking prohibited on both sides of the roadway;
·      Sidewalk/boulevard width of approximately 5.7 metres; and
·      Single row of trees provided on each side of the roadway.




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                   8
                                                                                                      8
The configuration of all other sections of Gladstone Avenue and Peel Avenue differ between
each of the alternatives developed. For all alternatives, the intersection of Peel Avenue and
Gladstone Avenue is proposed to be all-way stop controlled.

Each alternative was analyzed and evaluated in detail utilizing five criteria groups:

       Transportation: Impacts to traffic conditions and overall safety and service including
       cyclist, pedestrian, transit and emergency services impacts;
       Socio-Economic Environment: Residential, business and access impacts, noise and
       vibration impacts, traffic infiltration impacts and urban design/aesthetics;
       Natural Environment: Impacts to vegetation, wildlife, stormwater and air quality;
       Cultural: Archaeological and built heritage impacts; and
       Costs: Construction and maintenance costs.

The full evaluation table is provided in Attachment 6 of this report. Based on the results of the
analysis and evaluation, Alternative 4 was identified as the Preferred Solution. Alternative 4
provides the maximum sidewalk/boulevard space to enhance pedestrian infrastructure and
eliminates the potential for eastbound and southbound cut through traffic. Alternative 4 also
provides the most narrow road width, conforms to a typical local roadway and has the most
positive impact on the natural environment. Alternative 4 provides the maximum benefits for
improving the public realm, providing the maximum green space and an opportunity to convert
these roadways from minor arterial roadways to local roadways.

Preferred Design

The Preferred Design is Alternative 4, which includes the following elements:

       Roadway narrowed from approximately 13.1 metres to approximately 8.6 metres;
       Single northbound lane on Gladstone Avenue (one-way operation);
       Single westbound lane on Peel Avenue (one-way operation);
       Parallel parking provided on both sides of roadway;
       Sidewalk/boulevard width of approximately 5.7 metres; and
       Double row of trees provided where possible (subject to utility locations and detailed
       design).

The existing road width on Peel Avenue in the vicinity of the driveway of Premises No. 11 Peel
Avenue is maintained to accommodate truck access in the reverse movement.

A plan of the Preliminary Preferred Solution (Alternative 4) is shown in Attachment 7 of this
report.

The above project costs are included in the 2010 Transportation Capital Program List 'B' Priority
Projects. This project may be substituted in-year, in place of Approved 2010 Capital Program
projects based on funding surplus, funding re-allocations, or approved projects conflicts. Where
a funding re-allocation is required Council Authority is necessary. The actual work date is
subject to City priorities and coordination of work.



Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                   9
                                                                                                    9
It should be noted, however, that it is proposed that this preferred design be modified to address
the requirements of the Fire Services Division as discussed in further detail later in this report
and as reflected in the recommendations above.

Property Impacts

There are no requirements to acquire private property for this project.

Public/Agency Concerns

Bicycle Lanes

Some residents at the POH held on May 26, 2009 indicated that they were disappointed that none
of the proposed alternatives included bicycle lanes. City staff investigated the feasibility of
providing bicycle lanes on Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue and do not recommend
implementing them at this time for the following reasons:

·      Once the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination project is complete, there will be bicycle lanes
       through the tunnel on Dufferin Street, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West;

·      The reconstructed rail corridor has been designed to accommodate a future multi-use trail
       with proposed connections at Dufferin Street near Peel Avenue;

·      For the Westend Bikeways Project, an east-west bicycle route has been identified on
       Argyle Street, just north of the study area;

·      Due to the expected decrease in traffic volumes, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue
       could be re-classified from minor arterial roadways to local roadways, which are
       considered comfortable for cyclists and do not require a dedicated facility (i.e. bicycle
       lanes);

·      Given the proposed one-way operations, cyclists would have to be prohibited from using
       Peel Avenue in the eastbound direction and Gladstone Avenue in the southbound
       direction;

·      Although contra-flow bicycle lanes have been provided on other one-way streets, it is not
       desirable to provide contra-flow bicycle lanes beside a parking lane;

·      Reasonable access to the Argyle Street bicycle route can be achieved from Queen Street
       West in the northbound direction via Gladstone Avenue and to Queen Street West in the
       southbound direction via Peel Avenue and Dufferin Street due to the bicycle lanes on
       Dufferin Street between Queen Street West and Peel Avenue;

·      At the time of implementation of the multi-use trail in the rail corridor, the need for
       parking and contra-flow bicycle lanes will be re-evaluated; and



Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                   10
                                                                                                     10
·      Alternative 4 allows for a contra-flow bicycle lane in the future without altering the
       physical layout of the roadway since the required width of a contra-flow bicycle lane is
       approximately the same width as the parking lane, which would have to be removed.

Truck Access

Should the function of Premises No. 11 Peel Avenue change in the future, the following features
will be evaluated:

       Narrowing the road width in the vicinity of Premises No. 11 Peel Avenue to the same
       road width as proposed on all other sections of Peel Avenue;
       Providing on-street parking in the vicinity of the driveway of Premises No. 11 Peel
       Avenue;
       Implementing trees on the south side of Peel Avenue, in the vicinity of the driveway of
       Premises No. 11 Peel Avenue; and
       Implementing a contra-flow bicycle lane and removing parking on one side of the
       roadway.

Emergency Services

Some of the affected agency groups showed interest in the study and a few expressed potential
issues, including Fire Services and Toronto Police Services. Following the POH held on May 26,
2009, meetings were held with representatives of Fire Services, Toronto Police Services and
Emergency Medical Services. All of the concerns raised regarding access were addressed
throughout the study and were incorporated in the evaluation of the alternatives. However, Fire
Services has now indicated that the Building Code requires a minimum 6.0m pavement width to
satisfy their operational needs. This is achieved on Peel Avenue, however, there are sections on
Gladstone Avenue which do not provide the 6.0 metre width. In order to achieve this
requirement while maintaining, to the greatest extent possible, the other objectives of this
initiative, the preferred design, as shown in Attachment 7, was refined, as follows, resulting in
the Recommended Solution shown in Attachment 8:

       The removal of approximately seven parking spaces on Gladstone Avenue;

       The reduction in the width of the boulevard on the east side of Gladstone Avenue,
       between Peel Avenue and approximately 10.0 metres south thereof, by approximately 1.8
       metres; and

       The reduction in the width of the boulevard on the west side of Gladstone Avenue,
       between Premises Nos. 8 and 20 Gladstone Avenue, by approximately 1.8 metres.

Permit Parking

As previously indicated, Peel Avenue currently has permit parking, with sixteen spaces available
and there are currently three permits issued. For the refined recommended preferred solution,
there will be a total of approximately five parking spaces provided. Chapter 925, Permit Parking,



Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                11
                                                                                                    11
of the City of Toronto Municipal Code, requires the City Clerk to place a Public Notice in a
major newspaper requesting those that object to this proposal forward their objection in writing
to the City Clerk.

As such, a Public Notice will be placed in a major newspaper and provided there are no
objections to the newspaper notice, Transportation Services will proceed with the removal of the
permit parking spaces should City Council approve the recommendations of this report.


Next Steps

Pending approval of this report by City Council, the Project File will be compiled and filed in the
public record for a minimum 30-day period. Once EA approval is received, design and
construction of the Recommended Design may proceed, and is currently planned to occur in
2010, in conjunction with works already planned in the Capital Works Program.

CONTACT

Marilia Cimini, P.Eng.
Transportation Engineer, Infrastructure Planning
Tel:    416 338-6582
Fax:    416 392-4808
E-mail: mcimini@toronto.ca

SIGNATURE




Gary Welsh, P.Eng.
General Manager, Transportation Services

MC/sr/if

ATTACHMENTS

1.   List of Relevant Review Agencies
2.   Study Area
3.   Summary of Parking Demand Survey
4.   Approximate Number of Parking Spaces Provided
5.   Approximate Width of Sidewalk/Boulevard Space Provided
6.   Evaluation Table
7.   Preliminary Preferred Solution
8.   Recommended Solution



Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study                  12
                                                                                                      12
                                            Attachment 1


            Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study
                             List of Relevant Review Agencies


     Ministry of Agriculture, Food & Rural Affairs
     Ministry of Citizenship, Culture, Tourism & Recreation
     Ministry of Culture
     Ministry of Education
     Ministry of the Environment
     Environment Canada, Great Lakes & Corporate Affairs
     Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing
     Ministry of Natural Resources
     Toronto & Region Conservation Authority
     Ministry of Transportation
     Bell Canada
     CN Rail
     CP Rail
     Enbridge Gas Distribution Inc.
     Enbridge Pipeline Inc.
     Go Transit
     Hydro One Networks Inc. Network Services
     Rogers Cable Systems
     Sarnia Products Pipe Line
     Sun-Canadian Pipe Line Company Limited
     Toronto Hydro
     Trans-Northern Pipe Line
     Toronto Transit Commission
     Toronto District School Board
     Toronto Catholic District School Board
     Conseil Scolaire de district
     Toronto Police Services
     Toronto Fire Services
     Toronto Emergency Medical Services
     Toronto Pedestrian Committee
     Toronto Cycling Committee
     Indian & Northern Affairs Canada
     Ontario Secretariat for Aboriginal Affairs
     Mississauga's of the New Credit First Nation




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study          13
                                                                                      13
                                            Attachment 2


            Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study
                                        Study Area




             LEGEND
            N

            Study Boundary

            Study Focus

            Signalized Intersection




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study          14
                                                                                      14
                                            Attachment 3


            Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study
                            Summary of Parking Demand Survey




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study          15
                                                                                      15
                                            Attachment 4


            Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study
                     Approximate Number of Parking Spaces Provided




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study          16
                                                                                      16
                                            Attachment 5


            Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study
                 Approximate Width of Sidewalk/Boulevard Space Provided




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study          17
                                                                                      17
                                            Attachment 6

            Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study
                                     Evaluation Table




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study          18
                                                                                      18
                                     Attachment 6 (continued)

            Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study
                                     Evaluation Table




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study          19
                                                                                      19
                                                                Attachment 7

                               Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study
                                                 Preliminary Preferred Solution




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study          20
                                                                                                    20
                                                                Attachment 8

                               Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study
                                                     Recommended Solution




Staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study          21
                                                                                                    21
                         Minutes


           Public Works and Infrastructure Committee

Meeting No.    30                                   Contact Candy Davidovits, Committee
                                                            Administrator
Meeting Date   Tuesday, February 2, 2010            Phone   416-392-8032
Start Time     9:30 AM                              E-mail    pwic@toronto.ca
Location       Committee Room 1, City Hall          Chair     Councillor Glenn De Baeremaeker




PW30.11                  ACTION              Amended                                     Ward: 18

Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment
Study

Committee Recommendations
The Public Works and Infrastructure Committee submits to City Council, without
recommendation, the report (January 20, 2010) from the General Manager, Transportation
Services.

Decision Advice and Other Information
The Public Works and Infrastructure Committee requested the General Manager,
Transportation Services, in consultation with the local Councillor, to submit a report directly to
City Council with amended recommendations which address the concerns of Toronto Fire
Services.

Origin
(January 20, 2010) Report from General Manager, Transportation Services

Summary
A Class Environmental Assessment Study was undertaken to review the feasibility of widening
the sidewalk/boulevard to enhance the streetscape of Peel Avenue and a portion of Gladstone
Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, by narrowing the existing pavement
width. Currently, these roadways operate two-way and accommodate through traffic diverted
from Dufferin Street due to the discontinuity of Dufferin Street between Peel Avenue and




                                                                                                     22
Queen Street West. As a result of the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project, Peel Avenue and
Gladstone Avenue will no longer need to accommodate through traffic from Dufferin Street
and the resulting decrease in traffic volumes on these roads has enabled consideration of a
reduction in the pavement width. The evaluation of a reasonable range of alternative solutions,
which included consultation with the public and review agencies, resulted in the following
Preferred Design:

-       The narrowing of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and the
       supermarket driveway (Price Chopper located at No. 22 Northcote Avenue), from 13.1
       metres to approximately 8.6 metres to include the following features:

       -         Single northbound lane on Gladstone Avenue (one-way operation);
       -         Single westbound lane on Peel Avenue (one-way operation);
       -         Parallel parking provided on both sides of roadway, increasing the total on-
                street parking supply from approximately 28 to 30 spaces;
       -         Sidewalk/boulevard width of approximately 5.7 metres on each side of Peel and
                Gladstone Avenues; and
       -         Double row of trees provided where possible (subject to utility locations and
                detailed design).

Subsequently, Fire Services confirmed their requirement for a minimum 6.0-metre pavement
width in accordance with the requirements of the Building Code and to satisfy their operational
needs. In order to achieve this requirement while maintaining, to the greatest extent possible,
the other objectives of this initiative, the preferred design was further refined, as follows,
resulting in the Recommended Solution:

-          the removal of approximately seven parking spaces on Gladstone Avenue;

-      the reduction in the width of the boulevard on the east side of Gladstone Avenue,
       between Peel Avenue and approximately 10.0 metres south thereof, by approximately
       1.8 metres; and

-      the reduction in the width of the boulevard on the west side of Gladstone Avenue,
       between premises Nos. 8 and 20 Gladstone Avenue, by approximately 1.8 metres.

A Notice of Study Completion reflecting this revised design must now be issued and the
Project File placed in the public record for a 30-day review period in accordance with the
requirements of the Municipal Class Environmental Assessment.

Background Information
PW30.11-Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study - Staff
Report and Attachments
(http://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2010/pw/bgrd/backgroundfile-26739.pdf)

Motions




                                                                                                  23
Motion to Amend Item moved by Councillor Adam Giambrone (Carried)
That item PW30.11 be submitted to City Council without recommendation and that the General
Manager, Transportation Services, in consultation with the local Councillor, be requested to
submit a report directly to City Council with amended recommendations which address the
concerns of Toronto Fire Services.




                                                                                               24
                                                STAFF REPORT
                                                ACTION REQUIRED

Supplementary Report - Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
Class Environmental Assessment Study

 Date:         February 19, 2010

 To:           City Council

 From:         General Manager, Transportation Services

 Wards:        Ward 18 ­ Davenport

 Reference
           p:\2010\ClusterB\tra\tim\cc10008tim
 Number:

SUMMARY

Public Works and Infrastructure (PWI) Committee, at its meeting on February 2, 2010, in
considering a staff report titled "Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental
Assessment Study" dated January 20, 2010 (PW30.11) recommended that the report be
submitted to City Council, without recommendation. PWI Committee also requested that the
General Manager, Transportation Services, in consultation with the local Councillor, submit a
report directly to City Council with amended recommendations which address the concerns of
Toronto Fire Services.

As requested by PWI Committee, the purpose of this report is to recommend the adoption of a
revised design for the reconfiguration of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue resulting from the
development and assessment of alternative designs, in consultation with the local Councillor, and
which satisfies the requirements of Toronto Fire Services and the Building Code.

A Notice of Study Completion reflecting this revised design must now be issued and the Project
File placed in the public record for a 30-day review period in accordance with the requirements
of the Municipal Class Environmental Assessment.

RECOMMENDATIONS

The General Manager, Transportation Services recommends that:

1.       The "Refined Recommended Solution" included as Attachment 1 of this report, which
         incorporates a minimum 6.4m clear pavement width that satisfies the requirements of
         Toronto Fire Services, be adopted;


Supplemental staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study            25   25
2.     Urban Forestry staff to be directed develop a tree planting plan for Peel and Gladstone
       Avenues that will identify the appropriate species of trees and soil conditions that will be
       incorporated into the detailed design of the road reconfiguration;

3.     Staff be requested to report to the Toronto and East York Community Council
       recommending that Legal Services amend § 313-33 and § 313-50 of the former City of
       Toronto Municipal Code Chapter 313, Streets and Sidewalks, to prohibit the construction
       and maintenance of fences, retaining, ornamental and toe walls and hard landscaping
       within the Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue public rights-of-way;

4.     Authority be granted to the General Manager of Transportation Services to issue a Notice
       of Study Completion and to file the Project File for the Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
       Class Environmental Assessment Study in the public record for 30-days in accordance
       with the requirements of the Municipal Class Environmental Assessment; and

5.     Appropriate City officials be authorized and directed to take the necessary action to give
       effect thereto.


Financial Impact

The estimated cost of the road modifications required to narrow Peel Avenue and a portion of
Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, in accordance with the
"Refined Recommended Solution" attached to this report, is approximately $270,000. This is the
same as the cost estimate of the recommended design in the previous January 20, 2010 staff
report.

Therefore, the financial impact of adopting the recommendations in this report is the same as the
financial impact contained in the previous report with which the Deputy City Manager and Chief
Financial Officer had reviewed and agreed.


DECISION HISTORY

Public Works and Infrastructure (PWI) Committee, at its meeting on February 2, 2010, in
considering a staff report titled "Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental
Assessment Study" dated January 20, 2010 (PW30.11) recommended that the report be
submitted to City Council, without recommendation. PWI Committee also requested that the
General Manager, Transportation Services, in consultation with the local Councillor, submit a
report directly to City Council with amended recommendations which address the concerns of
Toronto Fire Services.




Supplemental staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study              26   26
COMMENTS

In accordance with the request from PWI Committee, Transportation Services developed and
assessed several design alternatives for the narrowing of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue that
would satisfy the requirements of Toronto Fire Services for a minimum clear pavement width of
6.0 metres. As a result of this assessment, and in consultation with the local Councillor, a
"Refined Recommended Solution" was developed as described below.

Refined Recommended Solution

The "Refined Recommended Solution" includes the following elements:

       Roadway generally narrowed from approximately 13.1 metres to approximately 8.6
       metres which includes a 2.2m wide parking lane on alternating sides of the street;
       Single northbound lane on Gladstone Avenue (one-way operation);
       Single westbound lane on Peel Avenue (one-way operation);
       Sidewalk/boulevard width of approximately 5.7 metres; and
       Double row of trees provided where possible (subject to utility locations and detailed
       design).

The configuration satisfies Toronto Fire Services requirement for a minimum 6.0-metre clear
pavement width (i.e. excluding parking).

A plan of the Refined Recommended Solution is shown in Attachment 1 of this report.

Tree Plantings

Urban Forestry has recommended that the planting of large canopy native trees be included with
this road reconstruction project. Accordingly, it is recommended that Urban Forestry staff be
directed to develop a tree planting plan identifying the appropriate species and the soil conditions
to be incorporated into the detailed design of this project.

Property Impacts

There are no requirements to acquire private property for this project.

Other Issues

The local Councillor has requested that the construction of fences, walls, and hard landscaping
be prohibited within the Peel and Gladstone rights-of-way. This will require an amendment to
the appropriate sections of the Municipal Code, which City Council has delegated authority to
the Community Councils. Therefore, a separate report must be submitted to Toronto and East
York Community Council to give effect to foregoing.




Supplemental staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study              27   27
The Councillor also requested an enhanced treatment that would clearly demarcate the limits of
the public right-of-way. Staff will review the feasibility and implications of such a demarcation
for inclusion in the detailed design of the road reconstruction.


Next Steps

Pending approval of this report by City Council, the Project File will be compiled and filed in the
public record for a minimum 30-day period. Once EA approval is received, design and
construction of the Refined Recommended Solution may proceed, and is currently planned to
occur in 2010, in conjunction with works already planned in the Capital Works Program.


CONTACT

Marilia Cimini, P.Eng.
Transportation Engineer, Infrastructure Planning
Tel:    416 338-6582
Fax:    416 392-4808
E-mail: mcimini@toronto.ca



SIGNATURE




______________________________________
Gary Welsh, P.Eng.
General Manager, Transportation Services

JM/MC/


ATTACHMENT

1.   Refined Recommended Solution




Supplemental staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study             28   28
                                                                       Attachment 1

                                       Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study
                                                         Refined Recommended Solution




Supplemental staff report for action on Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class EA Study   29
                                                                                                            29
                         Minutes


                                     City Council

Meeting No.    46                                  Contact Marilyn Toft, Manager
Meeting Date   Monday, February 22, 2010           Phone
               Tuesday, February 23, 2010
Start Time     9:30 AM                             E-mail    clerk@toronto.ca
Location       Council Chamber, City Hall




PW30.11                 ACTION              Amended                                     Ward: 18

Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment
Study

City Council Decision
City Council on February 22 and 23, 2010, adopted the following:

1.      City Council adopt the "Refined Recommended Solution", included as Attachment 1 to
       the report (February 19, 2010) from the General Manager, Transportation Services,
       which incorporates a minimum 6.4m clear pavement width that satisfies the
       requirements of Toronto Fire Services.

2.      City Council direct Urban Forestry staff to develop a tree planting plan for Peel and
       Gladstone Avenues that will identify the appropriate species of trees and soil conditions
       that will be incorporated into the detailed design of the road reconfiguration.

3.      City Council request the General Manager, Transportation Services, to report to the
       Toronto and East York Community Council recommending that Legal Services amend
       § 313-33 and § 313-50 of the former City of Toronto Municipal Code Chapter 313,
       Streets and Sidewalks, to prohibit the construction and maintenance of fences, retaining,
       ornamental and toe walls and hard landscaping within the Peel Avenue and Gladstone
       Avenue public rights-of-way.

4.      City Council grant authority to the General Manager, Transportation Services to issue a
       Notice of Study Completion and to file the Project File for the Peel-Gladstone
       Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study in the public record for 30-days
       in accordance with the requirements of the Municipal Class Environmental Assessment.

5.      City Council authorize and direct the appropriate City officials to take the necessary
       action to give effect thereto.

                                                                                                   30
Background Information (Committee)
PW30.11-Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study - Staff
Report and Attachments
(http://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2010/pw/bgrd/backgroundfile-26739.pdf)

Background Information (City Council)
(February 19, 2010) supplementary report from the General Manager, Transportation Services
on the Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Class Environmental Assessment Study (PW30.11a)
(http://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2010/cc/bgrd/backgroundfile-27550.pdf)

Motions (City Council)
1 - Motion to Amend Item (Additional) moved by Councillor Adam Giambrone (Carried)
That City Council adopt the following recommendations contained in the report (February 19,
2010) from the General Manager, Transportation Services [PW30.11a]:

1.        The "Refined Recommended Solution" included as Attachment 1 of this report, which
         incorporates a minimum 6.4m clear pavement width that satisfies the requirements of
         Toronto Fire Services, be adopted.

2.       Urban Forestry staff to be directed develop a tree planting plan for Peel and Gladstone
         Avenues that will identify the appropriate species of trees and soil conditions that will
         be incorporated into the detailed design of the road reconfiguration.

3.        The General Manager, Transportation Services, be requested to report to the Toronto
         and East York Community Council recommending that Legal Services amend § 313-33
         and § 313-50 of the former City of Toronto Municipal Code Chapter 313, Streets and
         Sidewalks, to prohibit the construction and maintenance of fences, retaining,
         ornamental and toe walls and hard landscaping within the Peel Avenue and Gladstone
         Avenue public rights-of-way.

4.       Authority be granted to the General Manager, Transportation Services to issue a Notice
         of Study Completion and to file the Project File for the Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
         Class Environmental Assessment Study in the public record for 30-days in accordance
         with the requirements of the Municipal Class Environmental Assessment.

5.       Appropriate City officials be authorized and directed to take the necessary action to
         give effect thereto.

2 - Motion to Receive Item moved by Councillor Rob Ford (Lost)
That the Item be received for information.

Vote (Receive Item)                                                            Feb-23-2010 8:18 PM

Result: Lost              Majority Required - PW30.11 - Ford - Motion 2
Yes: 1                    Ford
                          Ainslie, Augimeri, Bussin (Chair), De Baeremaeker, Di Giorgio, Filion,
No: 27
                          Giambrone, Grimes, Hall, Heaps, Holyday, Jenkins, Kelly, Lee, McConnell,


                                                                                                     31
                      Mihevc, Milczyn, Moeser, Moscoe, Nunziata, Palacio, Perks, Perruzza,
                      Stintz, Thompson, Vaughan, Walker
                      Ashton, Carroll, Cho, Davis, Del Grande, Feldman, Fletcher, Lindsay Luby,
Absent: 17            Mammoliti, Miller, Minnan-Wong, Ootes, Pantalone, Parker, Rae,
                      Saundercook, Shiner


Motion to Adopt Item as Amended (Carried)




                                                                                                  32
2.0 BACKGROUND

Peel Avenue and the southern portion of Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen
Street West, are minor arterial roadways that accommodate through traffic diverted from
Dufferin Street due to the discontinuity of Dufferin Street, between Peel Avenue and Queen
Street West. The Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project will provide continuity on Dufferin
Street, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West. Construction began in the fall 2008 and is
expected to be complete in the summer 2010. Due to the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project,
Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue will no longer need to accommodate through traffic from
Dufferin Street and traffic volumes on these roads will decrease.

Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are scheduled to be reconstructed in 2010 as part of the
Capital Works Program. In addition, construction of the Sudbury Street Extension project began
in the fall 2008 and involves the extension of Sudbury Street to Queen Street West, opposite
Gladstone Avenue. As such, Sudbury Street will form the fourth leg of the signalized intersection
of Queen Street West and Gladstone Avenue. The anticipated completion time for the Sudbury
Street Extension is late 2010.

Due to the transformation of the road network in this area and the need to reconstruct Peel
Avenue and Gladstone Avenue in the near future, there is an opportunity to change the design
and configuration of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue to reflect future conditions and satisfy
stated objectives.

Based on the above, Transportation Services initiated an Environmental Assessment study to
review the feasibility of changing the design on Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue and evaluate
alternative methods to address these needs.

2.1 Study Area Location

The study area is located in Ward 18, Davenport in the City of Toronto. The study area is
bounded by Dundas Street West to the north, Dovercourt Road to the east, Sudbury Street to the
southeast, King Street West to the south, the C.N.R. / C.P.R. tracks to the southwest and Brock
Avenue to the west and is shown in the following map.




                                                                                                    33
          LEGEND
          N

         Study Boundary

         Study Focus

         Signalized Intersection




2.2 Purpose and Objectives of the Study

The purpose of this study is to review the feasibility of changing the design of Peel Avenue and
Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, and evaluate alternative
methods to address this.




                                                                                                   34
3.0 PROJECT APPROACH
3.1   Municipal Class Environmental Assessment Process

The study was conducted as a Class Environmental Assessment (EA) Study under the guidelines
of the Municipal Class Environmental Assessment (Municipal Class EA) which was produced by
the Municipal Engineers Association (MEA) and approved by the Minister of the Environment
as amended in 2007. The Municipal Class EA provides a streamlined, self-administered
framework for EA planning of municipal projects in accordance with the provisions of the
Environmental Assessment Act (EAA).

The project was classified as a Schedule B activity, as per Appendix 1 - Project Schedules in the
Municipal Class Environmental Assessment document, since its total cost for design and
construction of the streetscape improvements was anticipated to not exceed $2.2 million and it
meets the following description:
Reconstruction or widening where the reconstructed road or other linear paved facilities (e.g.
HOV lanes) will not be for the same purpose, use, capacity or at the same location as the facility
being reconstructed (e.g. additional lanes, continuous centre turn lane).

The Class Environmental Assessment Process is a five-phase process:
               Phase 1 - Identify the problem (deficiency) or opportunity.
               Phase 2 - Identify alternative solutions to address the problem or opportunity by
               taking into consideration the existing environment, and establish the preferred
               solution taking into account public and review agency input.
               Phase 3 - Examine alternative methods of implementing the preferred solution
               based upon the existing environment, public and review agency input, anticipated
               environmental effects and methods of minimizing negative effects and
               maximizing positive effects.
               Phase 4 - Document in an Environmental Study Report a summary of the
               rationale, and the planning, design, and consultation process of the project.
Phase 5, which involves detail design, preparation of contract drawings and tender documents,
construction and operation, and monitoring is not part of this study. As this study follows the
process for Schedule B projects, it is considered complete after Phase 2. See Appendix A for the
Municipal EA flowchart.

3.2    Purpose of Project File

The purpose of the Project File is to provide a complete account of the planning process that was
followed for this Study. This includes the following: a description of the opportunity; the
alternative solutions and designs developed and evaluated; all analyses undertaken and data
collected; issues raised and how they were addressed during the course of the Study; a
recommendation on the preferred design; and a mitigation plan to minimize any impacts on the
environment.

Upon authorization by the City of Toronto Council, this Project File will be filed with the Clerk
of the City of Toronto and placed on the public record for 30 calendar days for the review by the
public and review agencies. A Notice of Study Completion will be placed in the local newspaper
to advise the public and other stakeholders where the Project File for this Study may be
reviewed, and how to submit public comments. The notice will also advise the public and other


                                                                                                     35
stakeholders of their right to request a Part II Order (refer to Section 3.2.1), and how and when
such a request can be submitted.

For further information on the Municipal Class EA process, readers are referred to the October
2000, as amended in 2007 Municipal Class EA document. The City of Toronto Project Manager
for this Class EA study is available to discuss this information and can be contacted as follows:

                           Marilia Cimini, P. Eng.
                           Transportation Engineer, Infrastructure Planning
                           City of Toronto, Transportation Services
                           100 Queen Street West, 22nd Fl., East Tower
                           City Hall
                           Toronto, ON M5H 2N2
                           Tel:     (416) 338-6582
                           Fax:     (416) 392-4808
                           E-mail: mcimini@toronto.ca

3.2.1   Part II Order

Under the Municipal Class EA, members of the public, interest groups, agencies, and other
stakeholders may submit a written request to the Minister of the Environment to require the
proponent (the City of Toronto) to comply with Part II of the Environmental Assessment Act
before proceeding with the proposed undertaking. Part II of the EA Act addresses Individual
Environmental Assessments. The request for a Part II Order must also be copied to the City of
Toronto at the same time it is submitted to the Minister. Written requests for a Part II Order must
be submitted to the Minister within the 30-calendar day review period after the proponent has
issued the Notice of Completion. Requests after the 30-calendar day review period will not be
considered. The Minister of the Environment can be contacted as follows:

                              John Gerretsen
                              Minister of the Environment
                              77 Wellesley Avenue
                              Ferguson Block, 11th Floor
                              Toronto, ON M7A 2T5

3.3     Technical Working Group

The Study was managed by the Infrastructure Planning Unit, Transportation Infrastructure
Management Section of the Transportation Services Division. A Technical Advisory Committee
(TAC) was created to provide guidance and technical input into the Study. The TAC consisted
of staff from the following City departments and sections:
          Transportation Services/Traffic Operations
          Transportation Services/Traffic Planning
          Transportation Services/Pedestrian and Cycling Infrastructure
          City Planning/Transportation Planning
          City Planning/Community Planning
          City Planning/Urban Design
          City Planning/Urban Forestry


                                                                                                      36
        Technical Services/Design & Construction
        Toronto Water/Water Infrastructure Management
        Toronto Parking Authority
The Committee also solicited input from other City departments and sections, and various
external agencies on an as-needed basis to provide guidance and input into the technical
analyses, evaluations and conclusions of the Study.

3.4   Public and Regulatory Agency Consultation
3.4.1 General

A significant and integral part of the Municipal Class EA process is consultation with the public
and regulatory agencies. A Consultation Program was continued throughout the study with the
objectives to:
                Identify potentially affected stakeholders;
                Provide information to the stakeholders on all components of the Study;
                Obtain input from these stakeholders during all phases of the Study; and
                Integrate information received into the planning and decision-making process,
                where applicable.
A wide range of stakeholders were identified and contacted at the start of the Study.
Stakeholders provided feedback or expressed interest in the study and indicated how they would
be directly or indirectly affected during the planning, construction or operation of the proposed
undertaking. In keeping within the guidelines of the Municipal Class EA, a number of methods
were used to contact potential stakeholders. The public and agency consultation program is
described in the following sections.

3.4.2 Summary of Public Consultation Process
3.4.2.1 Notice of Commencement and Public Open House #1

Public involvement was an integral and ongoing part of the study process for the Peel-Gladstone
Reconstruction Class EA Study. The public consultation requirements of the Class EA were met
and surpassed. A Notice of Study Commencement and Public Open House #1 was advertised in
the May 14 and 21, 2009 editions of NOW Magazine and the May 15 and 22, 2009 editions of
the Parkdale-Liberty Villager newspaper. This notice announced the initiation of the Class EA
Study and invited interested stakeholders to participate at a Public Open House #1(POH #1)
which was held on May 26, 2009 to present the list of alternative solutions that were developed
and identify the next steps of the study. This notice is shown in Appendix B.

Through Canada Post, notices were also directly mailed to relevant review agencies and resident
stakeholder groups, and were distributed to approximately 7,800 residents and businesses within
the study area via "Canada Post Unaddressed Admail". Notices were also distributed through
direct mail to the local BIA and ratepayer groups and external agencies.

A public mailing list was created and continually updated to include all members of the public
who have made written submissions, telephoned, emailed, or completed comment forms during
the Study. Individuals on the mailing list were sent notices prior to the public meeting.




                                                                                                    37
3.4.2.2 Study Project Website

A project website was created which included background information about the project, the
project notice, Public Open House (POH) details and staff contact information. The website can
be viewed at:
http://www.toronto.ca/involved/projects/peel_gladstone/index.htm
Project websites are a very informative tool for the public and allows them to review information
provided at public meetings at their own schedule.

3.4.2.3 Public Open House #1

The POH #1 was held on Tuesday May 26, 2009 from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. at Alexander
Muir/Gladstone Avenue Public School, located at 108 Gladstone Avenue. The purpose of the
meeting was to present the study background, the list of alternative solutions that were developed
and identify the next steps of the study. Notices for this meeting were distributed to those
indicated in Section 3.4.2.1. Thirty-one members of the public signed in at the meeting and nine
comment sheets were received.

The POH #1 was attended by the local City councillor and included display boards describing
the project, and staff members were present to answer questions relating to the Study. Residents
were requested to sign-in at the POH #1 and comment forms were also made available for them
to complete to allow them to provide input on the Study. The meeting notice (also found in
Appendix B), display material and a summary of public comments from the POH #1 can be
found in Appendix C.

3.4.2.4 Public Open House #2

The second Public Open House was held on Monday November 16, 2009 from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. at St. John's Cathedral, located at 186 Cowan Avenue. The purpose of the meeting was to
present the study background, evaluation of the alternative solutions, the preliminary preferred
solution, how feedback from the May 2009 meeting had been incorporated and the next steps of
the study.

A notice of the event was advertised in the November 12, 2009 edition of NOW Magazine and
the November 13, 2009 edition of the Parkdale-Liberty Villager newspaper. Notices were also
distributed to approximately 9,800 residents via "Canada Post Unaddressed Admail" within the
study area. The project also sent flyers through direct mail to local stakeholder groups such as
the BIA and ratepayer groups as well as individuals who requested to be on the project mailing
list. The project website was updated and included background information about the project,
Public Open House details and staff contact information.

The POH #2 included display boards describing the project, and staff members were present to
answer questions relating to the Study. Residents were requested to sign-in at the POH #2 and
comment forms were also made available for them to complete to allow them to provide input on
the Study. Thirty-four members of the public signed in at the meeting and fourteen comment
sheets were received. The meeting notice, display material and a summary of public comments
from the POH #2 can be found in Appendix D.



                                                                                                     38
3.4.3   Agency Consultation

All regulatory agencies and utilities thought to be interested in or affected by the Project were
contacted to inform them of the Study, solicit their comments on issues they felt should be
addressed throughout the Class EA process, and request information they may have which was
of relevance to the Study. The following agencies and utility companies were contacted during
the course of the Study:
      Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs
      Ontario Ministry of Citizenship, Culture, Tourism & Recreation
      Ministry of Culture
      Ontario Ministry of Education
      Ontario Ministry of Environment
      Environment Canada, Great Lakes & Corporate Affairs
      Ontario Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing
      Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources
      Toronto and Region Conservation Authority
      Ontario Ministry of Transportation
      Indian & Northern Affairs Canada
      Ontario Ministry of Aboriginal Affairs
      Mississauga's of the New Credit First Nation
      Bell Canada
      CN Rail
      CP Rail
      Enbridge Gas Distribution Inc.
      Enbridge Pipeline Inc.
      GO Transit
      Hydro One Networks Inc.
      Rogers Cable Systems
      Sarnia Products Pipe Line
      Sun-Canadian Pipe Line Company Limited
      Toronto Hydro
      Trans-Northern Pipe Line
      Toronto Transit Commission
      Toronto District School Board
      Toronto Catholic District School Board
      Conseil Scolaire de district
      Toronto Police Services
      Toronto Fire Services
      Toronto Emergency Medical Services
      Toronto Pedestrian Committee
      Toronto Cycling Committee
      Toronto Diversity Management and Community Engagement
In general, most of the regulatory agencies and utilities did not have areas of interest within the
identified project study limits. Some of the agencies requested that they be placed on the mailing
list. One of the main concerns was from Toronto Fire Services in which they advised that they
have specific road design requirements. Several meeting were held to discuss these requirements.


                                                                                                      39
Their concerns were addressed and have been considered in the evaluation of the alternatives.
Agency consultation can be found in Appendix E.

3.4.4   Business Improvement Area (BIA) and Ratepayer Groups

The following BIA and Ratepayer groups were notified of the study:
    Brockton Triangle Neighbourhood Association
    Parkdale Residents Association
    Parkdale Village BIA
    West Queen West BIA
    Active 18

Prior to the POH #2, a meeting was held with a member of Active 18 to discuss the project.




                                                                                                40
4.0    PROBLEM / OPPORTUNITY STATEMENT

Within the study area, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are currently classified as minor
arterial roadways with approximately 12,000 vehicles daily and a speed limit of 50 km/h. For
both roadways, the pavement width is approximately 13.1 metres, sidewalks are provided on
both sides and TTC service is provided by the 29 Dufferin bus route. Currently, these roadways
accommodate through traffic from Dufferin Street due to the discontinuity of Dufferin Street
between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West.

Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are four lane roadways. On the north side of Peel Avenue,
parking is prohibited from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday to Friday and permit parking is
permitted from 12:01 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Regular parking is permitted at all other times. On the
south side of Peel Avenue, parking is prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., Monday to Friday
and permit parking is permitted from 12:01 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Regular parking is permitted at all
other times.

On the east side of Gladstone Avenue, stopping is prohibited from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
Monday to Friday and parking is prohibited at all times. On the west side of Gladstone Avenue,
parking is prohibited at all times from Peel Avenue to approximately 15 metres south thereof.
From approximately 15 metres south of Peel Avenue to approximately 60 metres north of Queen
Street West, stopping is prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
Monday to Friday and parking is permitted at all other times. From approximately 60 metres
north of Queen Street West to Queen Street West, stopping is prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday to Friday and standing is prohibited at all times.

There are traffic control signals at the intersection of Queen Street West and Gladstone Avenue.
The intersection of Dufferin Street and Peel Avenue is stop-controlled for westbound traffic on
Peel Avenue and the intersection of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue is stop-controlled for
southbound traffic on Gladstone Avenue.

The analysis of existing and future conditions on Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue identified
the opportunity to consider transportation and public realm improvements, as described in the
following points:

·      Peel Avenue and the portion of Gladstone Avenue between Peel Avenue and Queen
       Street West, are currently designed to accommodate through traffic, including TTC buses
       from Dufferin Street;

·      The Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project will provide continuity on Dufferin Street,
       between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West. Construction began in the fall 2008 and is
       expected to be complete in the summer 2010;

·      Due to the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue
       will no longer need to accommodate through traffic from Dufferin Street and traffic
       volumes on these roads will decrease;

·      Due to the expected decrease in traffic volumes, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue
       could be converted and re-classified from minor arterial roadways to local roadways;


                                                                                                   41
·   Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are scheduled to be reconstructed in 2010 as part of
    the Capital Works Program;

·   A cyclist/pedestrian trail is being considered along the CN/CP Railway corridor with
    potential connections to/from Dufferin Street;

·   Construction of the Sudbury Street Extension project began in the fall 2008 and involves
    the extension of Sudbury Street to Queen Street West, opposite Gladstone Avenue. As
    such, Sudbury Street will form the fourth leg of the intersection with traffic control
    signals at Queen Street West and Gladstone Avenue. The anticipated completion time for
    the Sudbury Street Extension is late 2010;

·   A parking demand survey indicates that although the demand for parking on Peel Avenue
    is not high, parking on Gladstone Avenue is being fully utilized, particularly during the
    afternoon off-peak period;

·   The City has received several development applications for the area surrounding Peel
    Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, particularly in the West Queen West triangle. One of the
    approved developments is located on the northwest corner of Queen Street West and
    Gladstone Avenue (No. 2 Gladstone Avenue). This development includes an eight-storey
    mixed use (residential/commercial) building. As part of the approval, the developer is
    required to provide streetscape features on Gladstone Avenue, adjacent to this property;

·   With increased development in this area, there will likely be an increase in demand for
    parking spaces. This could be achieved through the redesign of Peel Avenue and
    Gladstone Avenue;

·   The planned reconstruction of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue provides an
    opportunity to improve the public realm (i.e. streetscaping and street furniture); and

·   Based on the above, there is an opportunity to review the feasibility of changing the
    design of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue and evaluate alternative methods to
    address this.




                                                                                                42
5.0 INVENTORY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS

5.1   Natural Environment
5.1.1 Vegetation

The study area is highly urbanized and vegetation cover in the study focus area is limited to a
few plantings located on the east side of Gladstone Avenue, just north of Queen Street West on
the boulevard areas of the road rights-of-way.

The City of Toronto's Urban Forestry Unit has recommended that the planting of large canopy
native trees be included with this road reconstruction project, as shown in the alternative
solutions. Accordingly, Urban Forestry staff will develop a tree planting plan for the proposed
tree plantings identifying the appropriate species and the soil conditions, which comply with the
required standards, to be incorporated into the detailed design of this project.

5.1.2    Wildlife

Wildlife encountered/found within the study area can be considered typical of an urban setting
with no significant natural habitat areas and no endangered or rare species. Species that may be
found within the study area include raccoon, squirrel, skunk, woodchuck and various avian
species.

5.1.3    Water Course / Drainage

Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, have storm
sewers which were constructed in 1979. These roads are partially separated which means
catchbasins are connected to the storm sewer. Stormwater flow from weeping tiles and
downspouts likely discharge to the combined sewers. The storm sewer directs flow to the
Western Beaches Tunnel via Strachan Avenue.

The combined sewer directs dry weather flow to the Garrison Trunk Sewer and the High Level
Interceptor. There is a flow control structure in the combined sewer, weir 275.0, located at
Gladstone Avenue just north of Queen Street West. During wet weather, overflows are diverted
to the Western Beaches Tunnel via Dufferin Street. Additional diversions are provided
downstream. There is a diversion at Strachan Avenue to the Western Beaches Tunnel and one
that diverts flow directly to Lake Ontario at the intersection of Queens Quay West & Dan Leckie
Way. There are no water courses located within the study area.


5.2      Socio-Economic Environment

The Study Area is located entirely within the City of Toronto and can be described as a well-
developed urbanized setting with a mix of residential, commercial and employment uses.
Review of Map 18 - Land Use Plan in the Official Plan (2002), see Appendix F, indicates that
the following land use designations are found within the Study Area:

         Mixed Use Areas designation along the north side of Queen Street West and on the
         Gladstone Avenue from Peel Avenue to Queen Street West, which permits a range of
         residential, commercial and institutional uses;

                                                                                                    43
        Neighbourhoods designation in the residential areas north of Queen Street West (with the
        exception of the Mixed Use Areas described above) and in the area within the vicinity of
        Sudbury Street, which permits low-scale residential buildings and institutional uses along
        with small-scale retail, service and office uses;

        Employment Areas designation on lands east of Dufferin Street from the CN/CP Railway
        corridor to Peel Avenue as well as west of Dufferin Street from the CN/CP Railway
        corridor to Florence Street, which permits a range of employment uses;

        Regeneration Areas designation on lands north of the CN/CP Railway corridor from
        Queen Street West to Dovercourt Road (with the exception of the Neighbourhoods area
        described above), which permits commercial, residential, live/work, institutional and
        light industrial uses which can be mixed within the same block or even the same
        building; and

        Parks designation on a local park bounded by Brock Avenue to the west, Frankish
        Avenue to the north, Sheridan Avenue to the east and Middleton Street to the south.


5.3   Physical Infrastructure
5.3.1 Pavement Condition

As previously indicated, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are scheduled to be reconstructed
in 2010 as part of the Capital Works Program. This is consistent with the completion of the
Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project which is expected to be complete in the summer 2010.
Road reconstruction consists of the removal of the asphalt surface and the existing concrete road
base followed by placing new concrete road base and asphalt layers (base and surface). As such,
the planned reconstruction of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue provides an opportunity to
rehabilitate the roadway and improve the public realm (i.e. streetscaping and street furniture).

5.3.2   Sidewalk Condition

As part of the road reconstruction on Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, new concrete
sidewalks will be constructed. This work consists of replacement of the existing sidewalk with
new concrete sidewalk.


5.4     Transportation / General Traffic
5.4.1   Designation and Network Significance

Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, are classified
by the City of Toronto as "minor arterial" roadways with approximately 12,000 vehicles daily
and a speed limit of 50 km/h. For both roadways, the pavement width is approximately 13.1
metres and there are two lanes in each direction. Peel Avenue is approximately 120 metres and
Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West is approximately 170 metres.




                                                                                                     44
Under the City of Toronto's Road Classification System, a "Minor Arterial" is described as a
roadway carrying between 8,000 to 20,000 vehicles per day, with a legal speed limit ranging
between 40 to 60 km/h, and with sidewalks on both sides.

5.4.2   Road Configuration

Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, is a four-lane
roadway with TTC service provided by the 29 Dufferin bus route. The right-of-way width
(property line to property line) of both roadways is approximately 20.0 metres and the existing
pavement width is approximately 13.1 metres.

5.4.3   Parking

On the north side of Peel Avenue, parking is prohibited from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday to
Friday and permit parking is permitted from 12:01 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Regular parking is permitted
at all other times. On the south side of Peel Avenue, parking is prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday to Friday and permit parking is permitted from 12:01 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Regular
parking is permitted at all other times.

On the east side of Gladstone Avenue, stopping is prohibited from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
Monday to Friday and parking is prohibited at all times. On the west side of Gladstone Avenue,
parking is prohibited at all times from Peel Avenue to approximately 15 metres south thereof.
From approximately 15 metres south of Peel Avenue to approximately 60 metres north of Queen
Street West, stopping is prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
Monday to Friday and parking is permitted at all other times. From approximately 60 metres
north of Queen Street West to Queen Street West, stopping is prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday to Friday and standing is prohibited at all times.

A parking demand survey was undertaken on Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel
Avenue and Queen Street West, on Wednesday March 11 and Thursday March 12, 2009. The
results of this survey are shown in Appendix G.

5.4.4   Traffic Control Devices

There are traffic control signals at the intersection of Queen Street West and Gladstone Avenue.
The intersection of Dufferin Street and Peel Avenue is stop-controlled for westbound traffic on
Peel Avenue and the intersection of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue is stop-controlled for
southbound traffic on Gladstone Avenue.

5.4.5   Public Transit Service

The Toronto Transit Commission operates the 29 Dufferin bus route on Peel Avenue and
Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, which runs approximately
every 3 to 6 minutes during the weekday morning and afternoon peak periods, every 4 to 13
minutes during the weekday off-peak period and every 10 minutes or better on weekends. The 29
Dufferin bus route operates on a shared right-of-way with general traffic.




                                                                                                     45
5.4.6   Traffic Operations

Traffic count data indicates that traffic volumes on Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between
Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, are in the range of 12,000 vehicles (two-way) for a 24-hour
period. See Appendix H for turning movement count summary reports.

5.4.7   Existing Pedestrian Conditions

Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, are classified
as a Minor Arterial Roads. There are sidewalks provided on both sides of each roadway which
meets the City's requirements of arterial roads.

Any roadway reconstruction/rehabilitation project may provide opportunities to improve the
pedestrian environment by increasing existing sidewalk widths and boulevard areas to
accommodate pedestrian safety and amenities.

5.4.8   Cyclist Traffic Conditions within the Study Area

Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, does not
currently have a designated bikeway facility and was not identified as a candidate for bicycle
lanes in the Toronto Bike Plan (2001).

However, one of the guiding principles of the Toronto Bike Plan is that every street is a cycling
street and should be made as safe and comfortable for cyclists as possible. The Bike Plan
recognizes that roadway reconstruction/rehabilitation projects typically provide opportunities to
improve the cycling environment on a roadway section.


5.5     Archaeology and Built Heritage

There are no archaeological concerns on Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel
Avenue and Queen Street West. One built heritage feature identified in the study focus area is
the Gladstone Hotel. However, there would be no impacts to this site with any of the alternative
solutions identified. A Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study report, dated December 4,
2009, was prepared by Historic Horizon Inc. and is found in Appendix I.




                                                                                                    46
6.0    ALTERNATIVE SOLUTIONS AND EVALUATION

Under the Municipal Class EA process, an examination of Alternative Solutions to address the
problem/opportunity statement is required for Schedule B projects. The development and
evaluation of alternative solutions for Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue included the
identification and evaluation of alternative cross sections to establish a preferred cross section.

6.1    Identification of Alternative Solutions

In following the Municipal Class EA process, there must be an evaluation of Alternative
Solutions to address the opportunity or deficiencies within the Study Area. Five alternative
solutions, including "Do Nothing", were developed and examined to determine the appropriate
solution. A brief description of these alternatives and the results of the evaluation are provided
below.

Alternative 1: The "Do Nothing" alternative was included as a benchmark for the assessment of
the other planning alternatives. As the name suggests, the "Do Nothing" alternative involves
leaving the roadway in its current configuration and would involve reconstructing the existing
roadway cross-section width of approximately 13.1 metres.

Alternative 2: This alternative solution involves narrowing the roadway by approximately 2.1
metres and providing a single lane in each direction of travel with parallel parking on both sides
of the roadway.

Alternative 3: This alternative solution involves narrowing the roadway by approximately 4.3
metres and providing a single lane in each direction of travel with parallel parking on one side
only.

Alternative 4: This alternative solution involves narrowing the roadway by approximately 4.5
metres and converting Gladstone Avenue and Peel Avenue to operate one-way in the northbound
and westbound direction, respectively, and providing parallel parking on both sides of the
roadway.

Alternative 5: This alternative solution involves narrowing the roadway by approximately 3.7
metres and converting Gladstone Avenue and Peel Avenue to operate one-way in the northbound
and westbound direction, respectively, and providing angle parking.

The alternatives are shown in Appendix J.

With the exception of Alternative 1 ("Do Nothing"), all of the alternative solutions developed
include the same roadway configuration on Gladstone Avenue, between the Price Chopper
Driveway (located at No. 22 Northcote Avenue) and Queen Street West. This includes the
following common elements:

       ·       A roadway cross-section of approximately 8.6 metres;

       ·       One northbound lane and one southbound lane;

       ·       Parking prohibited on both sides of the roadway;

                                                                                                      47
       ·       Sidewalk / boulevard width of approximately 5.7 metres; and

       ·       Single row of trees provided on each side of the roadway.

The configuration of all other sections of Gladstone Avenue and Peel Avenue differ between
each of the alternatives developed. For all alternatives, the intersection of Peel Avenue and
Gladstone Avenue is proposed to be all-way stop controlled.

6.2    Evaluation Criteria for Alternative Solutions

Alternative solutions are evaluated to identify the most cost effective preferred alternative with
the least impacts on the environment while providing the opportunity to create the best
streetscaping potential for pedestrians and cyclists. All alternatives were evaluated equally by the
same set of criteria to determine how well they addressed the following:

               Transportation: This criteria considered impacts to traffic conditions and overall
               safety and service including pedestrian, cyclist, transit and emergency services
               impacts;
               Socio-Economic Environment: This criteria considered impacts to residential,
               business and access impacts, noise and vibration impacts, traffic infiltration
               impacts and urban design / aesthetics;
               Natural Environment: This criteria considered impacts to vegetation, wildlife,
               stormwater and air quality;
               Cultural: This criteria considered archaeological and built heritage impacts; and
               Costs: These criteria considered construction and maintenance costs.

These alternatives were presented at the public meetings held on May 26, 2009 and November
16, 2009, and based on the results of the analysis and evaluation, Alternative 4, narrow the
roadway by approximately 4.5 metres and convert Gladstone Avenue and Peel Avenue to operate
one-way in the northbound and westbound direction, respectively, and provide parallel parking
on both sides of the roadway, was identified as the preferred solution. Alternative 4 provides the
maximum sidewalk / boulevard space to enhance pedestrian infrastructure and eliminates the
potential for eastbound and southbound cut through traffic. Alternative 4 also provides the most
narrow road width, conforms to a typical local roadway and has the most positive impact on the
natural environment. Alternative 4 provides the maximum benefits for improving the public
realm, providing the maximum green space and an opportunity to convert these roadways from
minor arterial roadways to local roadways.

The evaluation table of the five alternatives is shown in Appendix K.




                                                                                                       48
7.0    CONCERNS RAISED

Public Open House #1

As previously mentioned, there were thirty-one members of the public who signed in at the POH
#1, held on May 26, 2009, and nine comment sheets were received. Of the comment sheets
received, two residents preferred that Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue remain in their current
conditions. None of the residents commenting supported angle parking and half of the residents
who responded were in favour of converting Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue into one-way
streets while the other half were opposed.

Based on the comment sheets received, the following list indicates the level of importance for the
uses and features of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue:

           1.   Green Space
           2.   Pedestrian
           3.   Street Furniture
           4.   Cycling
           5.   Automobile
           6.   Parking

Although parking was viewed as least important to those who submitted comment sheets, the
local Councillor's office has received some requests by local residents and many requests by
business owners for additional parking spaces in the study area.

Bicycle Lanes

Some residents at the POH #1 indicated that they were disappointed that none of the proposed
alternatives included bicycle lanes. City staff investigated the feasibility of
providing bicycle lanes on Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue and do not recommend
implementing them at this time for the following reasons:

·      Once the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination project is complete, there will be bicycle lanes
       through the tunnel on Dufferin Street, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West;

·      The reconstructed rail corridor has been designed to accommodate a future multi-use trail
       with proposed connections at Dufferin Street near Peel Avenue;

·      For the Westend Bikeways Project, an east-west bicycle route has been identified on
       Argyle Street, just north of the study area;

·      Due to the expected decrease in traffic volumes, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue
       could be re-classified from minor arterial roadways to local roadways, which are
       considered comfortable for cyclists and do not require a dedicated facility (i.e. bicycle
       lanes);

·      Given the proposed one-way operations, cyclists would have to be prohibited from using
       Peel Avenue in the eastbound direction and Gladstone Avenue in the southbound
       direction;

                                                                                                     49
·      Although contra-flow bicycle lanes have been provided on other one-way streets, it is not
       desirable to provide contra-flow bicycle lanes beside a parking lane;

·      Reasonable access to the Argyle Street bicycle route can be achieved from Queen Street
       West in the northbound direction via Gladstone Avenue and to Queen Street West in the
       southbound direction via Peel Avenue and Dufferin Street due to the bicycle lanes on
       Dufferin Street between Queen Street West and Peel Avenue;

·      At the time of implementation of the multi-use trail in the rail corridor, the need for
       parking and contra-flow bicycle lanes will be re-evaluated; and

·      Alternative 4 allows for a contra-flow bicycle lane in the future without altering the
       physical layout of the roadway since the required width of a contra-flow bicycle lane is
       approximately the same width as the parking lane, which would have to be removed.

Truck Access

At the POH #1, the owners of Premises No. 11 Peel Avenue (former Samko Toy Warehouse)
advised the City that any narrowing of Peel Avenue in the vicinity of their driveway would make
it impossible for large trucks to access their driveway. Through a truck turning movement
analysis, City staff confirmed that large trucks would have difficulty accessing this driveway in
the reverse movement if the road width in the vicinity of the driveway is reduced, even with a
minor reduction.

Therefore, as a result of the concerns and issues identified by the owners of Premises No. 11 Peel
Avenue, the City refined Alternative 4 such that the existing road width on Peel Avenue in the
vicinity of the driveway of Premises No. 11 Peel Avenue would be maintained to accommodate
truck access in the reverse movement.

The Refined Preferred Solution (identified as the Preliminary Preferred Solution in Attachment 7
of the January 20, 2010 staff report) is shown in Appendix L.

Should the function of Premises No. 11 Peel Avenue change in the future, the following features
will be evaluated:

       Narrowing the road width in the vicinity of Premises No. 11 Peel Avenue to the same
       road width as proposed on all other sections of Peel Avenue;
       Providing on-street parking in the vicinity of the driveway of Premises No. 11 Peel
       Avenue;
       Implementing trees on the south side of Peel Avenue, in the vicinity of the driveway of
       Premises No. 11 Peel Avenue; and
       Implementing a contra-flow bicycle lane and removing parking on one side of the
       roadway.

Public Open House #2

As previously mentioned, there were thirty-four members of the public who signed in at the POH
#2, held on November 16, 2009, and fourteen comment sheets were received. Of those who

                                                                                                     50
commented on the Refined Preferred Solution, all were in support of it with the exception of one
resident who was opposed. One resident agreed with the Refined Preferred Solution for
Gladstone Avenue but not for Peel Avenue.

Emergency Services

As previously indicated, some of the affected agency groups showed interest in the study and a
few expressed potential issues, including Fire Services and Toronto Police Services. Following
the POH #1 held on May 26, 2009, meetings were held with representatives of Fire Services,
Toronto Police Services and Emergency Medical Services. All of the concerns raised regarding
access were addressed throughout the study and were incorporated in the evaluation of the
alternatives. However, Fire Services indicated that the Building Code requires a minimum 6.0
metre pavement width to satisfy their operational needs. This was achieved on Peel Avenue,
however, there were sections on Gladstone Avenue which did not provide the 6.0 metre width. In
order to achieve this requirement while maintaining, to the greatest extent possible, the other
objectives of this initiative, the Refined Preferred Solution, was slightly modified, as follows,
resulting in the Recommended Solution (identified as the Recommended Solution in Attachment
8 of the January 20, 2010 staff report), shown in Appendix M:

       The removal of approximately seven parking spaces on Gladstone Avenue;

       The reduction in the width of the boulevard on the east side of Gladstone Avenue,
       between Peel Avenue and approximately 10.0 metres south thereof, by approximately 1.8
       metres; and

       The reduction in the width of the boulevard on the west side of Gladstone Avenue,
       between Premises Nos. 8 and 20 Gladstone Avenue, by approximately 1.8 metres.

Public Works and Infrastructure Committee

As indicated in the Public Works and Infrastructure Committee minutes, shown in section 1.0,
although the concerns of Toronto Fire Services had been addressed in the Recommended
Solution, Public Works and Infrastructure Committee recommended that Transportation
Services, in consultation with the local Councillor submit a report directly to City Council with
amended recommendations which address the concerns of Fire Services, in order to review all
available options.

In accordance with the request from Public Works and Infrastructure Committee, Transportation
Services developed and assessed several design alternatives for the narrowing of Peel Avenue
and Gladstone Avenue that would satisfy the requirements of Toronto Fire Services for a
minimum clear pavement width of 6.0 metres. As a result of this assessment, and in consultation
with the local Councillor, a Refined Recommended Solution (identified as the Refined
Recommended Solution in Attachment 1 of the February 19, 2010 staff report) was developed
and is shown in Appendix N.




                                                                                                    51
Other Concerns

Permit Parking

As previously indicated, Peel Avenue currently has permit parking, with sixteen spaces available
and there are currently three permits issued. For the Refined Recommended Solution, there will
be a total of approximately five parking spaces provided. Chapter 925, Permit Parking, of the
City of Toronto Municipal Code, requires the City Clerk to place a Public Notice in a major
newspaper requesting those that object to this proposal forward their objection in writing to the
City Clerk.

As such, a Public Notice was placed in the Toronto Star on January 20, 2010 with an objection
period closing February 3, 2010 and there were no appeals received to the newspaper notice. As
such, Transportation Services may proceed with the removal of the permit parking spaces.




                                                                                                    52
8.0        REFINED RECOMMENDED SOLUTION

The Refined Recommended Solution (a refinement of Alternative 4) includes the following
elements:

              Roadway generally narrowed from approximately 13.1 metres to approximately
              8.6 metres which includes a 2.2 metre wide parking lane on alternating sides of
              the street;
              Single northbound lane on Gladstone Avenue (one-way operation);
              Single westbound lane on Peel Avenue (one-way operation);
              Sidewalk / boulevard width of approximately 5.7 metres; and
              Double row of trees provided where possible (subject to utility locations and
              detailed design).

The configuration satisfies Toronto Fire Services requirement for a 6.0 metre clear pavement
width (i.e. excluding parking).

The estimated cost of the Refined Recommended Solution is $270,000. This does not include
costs for the water and road reconstruction work that has already been identified in the Capital
Works Program for 2010 which includes Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, from Peel Avenue
to Queen Street West.




                                                                                                   53
9.0    POTENTIAL IMPACTS DURING CONSTRUCTION, MITIGATION and
       FUTURE COMMITMENTS

Tree Removal and Preservation
Measures for proper tree removal and preservation will follow prescribed guidelines of the City
of Toronto. Any removal of trees must be undertaken with regard to the City's Tree Protection
and Conservation Bylaw.

Construction Noise and Dust Control
The applicable by-laws of the City of Toronto will be adhered to and is a standard item in all
City construction contracts.

Traffic Control
As part of Transportation Services ongoing service delivery, staff with various City agencies will
provide selective monitoring during and after construction to ensure traffic operations are
maintained to a safe and efficient level of service.

Streetscape Design
Consultation will be carried out with the local City Councillor, area residents, the local ratepayer
group, businesses and City staff involved with the development of detailed design and
construction staging.




                                                                                                       54
     Appendix A
Municipal Class EA Process
Municipal Class EA Process
                       Appendix B
Notice of Study Commencement & Public Open
      House #1 and Newspaper Advertisements
The City of Toronto holds public consultations as one way to engage residents in the life of their city. Toronto thrives
on your great ideas and actions. We invite you to get involved.


Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
Municipal Class Environmental Assessment
Notice of Study Commencement & Public Open House
Public Consultation
We invite you to attend a Public Open House to learn about the work completed to date and the next steps in this process.
Details are as follows:
                                           Date: Tuesday May 26, 2009
                                           Time: 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
                                        Location: Alexander Muir/Gladstone Avenue Public School
                                                  108 Gladstone Avenue
Background
The City of Toronto has initiated a Municipal Class Environmental
Assessment to review the feasibility of changing the design of                     DUNDAS ST
                                                                                             W




                                                                                                                                                                                                        OSSIN
Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue (between Peel Avenue and
                                                                      II




                                                                                                                                                                                 DOVE
                                                                       II
                                                                         II




                                                                                                                                                     GLAD
                                                                          II
Queen Street West). Construction for the Dufferin Street Jog
                                                                            II




                                                                                                                                                                                                            GTON
                                                                             I II
                                                                                                                                          DUFF
                                                                               I




                                                                                  II
                                                                                       II




                                                                                                                                                                                    RCOU
Elimination project has begun and will result in continuity on
                                                                                          II
                                                                                             II
                                                                                                II
                                                                                                                                                       STON
                                                                                                                                             ERIN
                                                                                       LAND




                                                                                                                                                                                                               AVE
                                                                                                   II
Dufferin Street between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West.                                            II




                                                                                                                                                                                        RT R
                                                                                                         II
                                                                                                                                                          E AVE
                                                                                                            II
                                                                                                               II
                                                                                                                                                ST



Once completed, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue will no
                                                                                                                  II
                                                                                          SDOW




                                                                                                                     II




                                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                        II
                                                                                                                           II
                                                                                                                              II
longer need to accommodate through traffic on Dufferin Street                                                                    II
                                                                                                                                                                   AVE                                            N ST
                                                                                                                                                       PEEL
                                                                                                                          BROC




                                                                                                                                    II
                                                                                                                                                                                                      QUEE
                                                                                              NE A




                                                                                                                                       II
                                                                                                                                          II
and as such, there is an opportunity to modify these roads as a                                                                              II
                                                                                                                                                II
                                                                                                                                                   II
                                                                                                  VE




                                                                                                                             K AVE




                                                                                                                                                      II
result of the expected decrease in traffic volumes.                                                                                                      II
                                                                                                                                                            II
                                                                                                                                                               II
                                                                                              LEGEND                                                              I I I
                                                                                                                                                                        I I I
                                                                                                                                                                              I I I
                                                                                              N
The study is being carried out as a Schedule B project under the
                                                                                                                                                                                    I I I I
                                                                                                                                                                                            I I I I I I I
                                                                                                                                                                                                          I I I I I I I I I I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I I I I I I I I
                                                                                 Study Boundary
Municipal Class Environmental Assessment (Class EA) process.                                                         ST
                                                                                 Study Focus                    KING 0                484m
This process includes clearly establishing the problems and/or
opportunities to be addressed, and developing and evaluating a
reasonable range of alternative solutions. A Public Open House is being held to present the list of alternative solutions that have been
developed and identify the next steps of the study. Staff will be available to answer your questions and concerns and receive comments.

We would like to hear from you.
Public consultation is an important part of this study. If you would like more information, please contact:
                               Christine Paglialunga                                         Tel: 416-338-2400
                               Public Consultation Coordinator                               Fax: 416-392-2974
                               City of Toronto                                               TTY: 416-397-0831
                               Metro Hall, 19th Floor                                        cpaglia@toronto.ca
                               55 John Street, Toronto, ON M5V 3C6                           toronto.ca/involved/projects

Issue Date: May 14, 2009

Information will be collected in accordance with the Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. With the
exception of personal information, all comments will become part of the public record.
               Appendix C
Public Open House #1 and Summary of
                          Comments
The City of Toronto holds public consultations as one way to engage residents in the life of their city. Toronto thrives
on your great ideas and actions. We invite you to get involved.


Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
Municipal Class Environmental Assessment
Notice of Study Commencement & Public Open House
Public Consultation
We invite you to attend a Public Open House to learn about the work completed to date and the next steps in this process.
Details are as follows:
                                           Date: Tuesday May 26, 2009
                                           Time: 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
                                        Location: Alexander Muir/Gladstone Avenue Public School
                                                  108 Gladstone Avenue
Background
The City of Toronto has initiated a Municipal Class Environmental
Assessment to review the feasibility of changing the design of                     DUNDAS ST
                                                                                             W




                                                                                                                                                                                                        OSSIN
Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue (between Peel Avenue and
                                                                      II




                                                                                                                                                                                 DOVE
                                                                       II
                                                                         II




                                                                                                                                                     GLAD
                                                                          II
Queen Street West). Construction for the Dufferin Street Jog
                                                                            II




                                                                                                                                                                                                            GTON
                                                                             I II
                                                                                                                                          DUFF
                                                                               I




                                                                                  II
                                                                                       II




                                                                                                                                                                                    RCOU
Elimination project has begun and will result in continuity on
                                                                                          II
                                                                                             II
                                                                                                II
                                                                                                                                                       STON
                                                                                                                                             ERIN
                                                                                       LAND




                                                                                                                                                                                                               AVE
                                                                                                   II
Dufferin Street between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West.                                            II




                                                                                                                                                                                        RT R
                                                                                                         II
                                                                                                                                                          E AVE
                                                                                                            II
                                                                                                               II
                                                                                                                                                ST



Once completed, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue will no
                                                                                                                  II
                                                                                          SDOW




                                                                                                                     II




                                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                        II
                                                                                                                           II
                                                                                                                              II
longer need to accommodate through traffic on Dufferin Street                                                                    II
                                                                                                                                                                   AVE                                            N ST
                                                                                                                                                       PEEL
                                                                                                                          BROC




                                                                                                                                    II
                                                                                                                                                                                                      QUEE
                                                                                              NE A




                                                                                                                                       II
                                                                                                                                          II
and as such, there is an opportunity to modify these roads as a                                                                              II
                                                                                                                                                II
                                                                                                                                                   II
                                                                                                  VE




                                                                                                                             K AVE




                                                                                                                                                      II
result of the expected decrease in traffic volumes.                                                                                                      II
                                                                                                                                                            II
                                                                                                                                                               II
                                                                                              LEGEND                                                              I I I
                                                                                                                                                                        I I I
                                                                                                                                                                              I I I
                                                                                              N
The study is being carried out as a Schedule B project under the
                                                                                                                                                                                    I I I I
                                                                                                                                                                                            I I I I I I I
                                                                                                                                                                                                          I I I I I I I I I I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I I I I I I I I
                                                                                 Study Boundary
Municipal Class Environmental Assessment (Class EA) process.                                                         ST
                                                                                 Study Focus                    KING 0                484m
This process includes clearly establishing the problems and/or
opportunities to be addressed, and developing and evaluating a
reasonable range of alternative solutions. A Public Open House is being held to present the list of alternative solutions that have been
developed and identify the next steps of the study. Staff will be available to answer your questions and concerns and receive comments.

We would like to hear from you.
Public consultation is an important part of this study. If you would like more information, please contact:
                               Christine Paglialunga                                         Tel: 416-338-2400
                               Public Consultation Coordinator                               Fax: 416-392-2974
                               City of Toronto                                               TTY: 416-397-0831
                               Metro Hall, 19th Floor                                        cpaglia@toronto.ca
                               55 John Street, Toronto, ON M5V 3C6                           toronto.ca/involved/projects

Issue Date: May 14, 2009

Information will be collected in accordance with the Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. With the
exception of personal information, all comments will become part of the public record.
                      Welcome


     Public Open House No. 1


Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
 Environmental Assessment
            Study

           Municipal Class EA



 Please sign in so that we can
keep you updated on this study


Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                 Study Area Map




                                    LEGEND
                            North

                            Study Boundary

                            Study Focus




Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
               Purpose and Background

·   Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen
    Street West, are minor arterial roadways that accommodate through traffic
    from Dufferin Street due to the discontinuity of Dufferin Street between
    Peel Avenue and Queen Street West.

·   The Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project will provide continuity on
    Dufferin Street between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West.
    Construction began in the Fall 2008 and is expected to be complete in
    June 2010.

·   Due to the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project, Peel Avenue and
    Gladstone Avenue will no longer need to accommodate through traffic on
    Dufferin Street and traffic volumes on these roads are expected to
    decrease.

·   Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are scheduled to be reconstructed as
    part of the Capital Works Program.

·   A cyclist / pedestrian trail is being considered along the CN/CP Railway
    corridor with potential on/off ramps on Dufferin Street.

·   Construction of the Sudbury Street Extension project began in the Fall
    2008 and involves the extension of Sudbury Street to Queen Street West,
    adjacent to Gladstone Avenue. As such, Sudbury Street will be included
    with the traffic control signals at Queen Street West and Gladstone
    Avenue. The anticipated completion time for the Sudbury Street Extension
    is late 2010.

·   The purpose of this study is to conduct an Environmental Assessment to
    review the feasibility of changing the design of Peel Avenue and Gladstone
    Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, and evaluate
    alternative methods to address this.




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
           Environmental Assessment

·   An Environmental Assessment (EA) Study is required
    for any roadway alteration under the EA Act. The Act
    requires that a reasonable range of alternatives be
    developed and that all aspects of each alternative be
    assessed and evaluated to determine the impact on
    the environment. The criteria used to evaluate each
    alternative includes:
     ­ Transportation
     ­ Socio-Economic Environment
     ­ Natural Environment
     ­ Cultural
     ­ Engineering and Cost

·   The EA Act also requires that the public be consulted
    during the EA process.

·   This study is being conducted in accordance with the
    requirements of the Municipal Class EA for Schedule
    B projects. The following board illustrates the major
    steps in completing this process.




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
            The Class EA Process
          Phase 1
Define Problem / Opportunity


            Phase 2
 Identify Alternative Solutions         Public Open House
                                               No. 1
Evaluate Solutions and Identify           May 26, 2009
Preliminary Preferred Solution
                                        Public Open House
                                               No. 2
Refine Preliminary Preferred             September 2009
Solution Based on Comments



  Document Findings in the
       Project File
                                           City of Toronto
                                          Council Approval
    30-Day Review Period


        Implementation



 Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
       Existing Plan and Cross-Section
Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue:




     3.4 m               Approximately 13.1 m (varies)     3.4 m




·   The right-of-way identifies the property owned by the City
    of Toronto to provide roadways, sidewalks, boulevards
    and other public uses.
·   The rights-of-way on Peel Avenue and Gladstone
    Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West,
    are approximately 20 metres each.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                  Existing Operating Conditions


                                                                    4PM - 6PM, MON - FRI


                                                                      12:01AM - 7AM,
                                                                    EXCEPT BY PERMIT
    PEEL AVENUE &
  GLADSTONE AVENUE
- 50 km/h speed limit;
-classified as minor arterial
roadways;
-12,000 vehicles daily;
-TTC service provided by the
29 Dufferin bus;
-sidewalks on both sides;                                       7AM - 9AM, MON - FRI
and
                                                                      12:01AM - 7AM,
                                                                    EXCEPT BY PERMIT                                  4PM -
-pavement is approximately                                                                                             6PM,
13.1 metres wide.                                                                                                    MON - FRI




                                                                                           7AM - 9AM, MON - FRI


                                                                                           4PM - 6PM, MON - FRI



                                                                                                                      4PM -
           LEGEND                                                                                                      6PM,
                                                                                                                     MON - FRI
       Traffic control signals
       "Stop" sign
                                   future
       One-way operation
                                 connection
       Laning
       TTC stop
       No Parking
                                                                                7AM - 9AM, MON - FRI
       No Standing
                                                                                                                      4PM -
                                                                                4PM - 6PM, MON - FRI
                                                                                                                       6PM,
       No  Stopping
        DRAWING NOT TO SCALE
                                                                                                                     MON - FRI




                                                                                                                     future
                                       gr                                                                         connection to
                                            ad
                                                 e-                                                                 Sudbury
                                                   se
                                                        pa                                                           Street
                                                             ra
                                                               te
                                                                    d
                                                                        ra
                                                                           i   lc
                                                                                    ro
                                                                                       ss
                                                                                          in
                                                                                               g




      Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
       Existing Peak Hour Traffic Volumes




                                                                                                                                  100 (74)
                                 389 (319)




                                                                                                                     4 (5)
                                              264 (408)




LEGEND




                                                                                                                                                       242 (407)
       Right Turn
       Through
       Left Turn


 00 Weekday AM
 (00) Weekday PM




                                               future
                                                                                                                                                                   21 (28)
                                             connection
                                                                                                                                                                   20 (38)
                                                                                                                                                256 (368)
                                                                                                                                                              22 (52)
                                                                                                                      249 (203)
                                                                                                                                    135 (134)




                                                                                                                                                             89 (132)


                                                                                                                184 (280)                                                       future
                                                    gr
                                                         ad                                                                                                                  connection to
                                                              e-                                                                                                               Sudbury
                                                                se
                                                                     pa                                                                                                         Street
                                                                          ra
                                                                            te
                                                                                 d
                                                                                     ra
                                                                                        i   lc
                                                                                                 ro
                                                                                                    ss
                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                            g

* Counts were undertaken on Wednesday March 11 & Thursday March 12, 2009




      Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
              Existing Parking Availability



   LEGEND
Traffic control signals




                                                          lane




                                                                                                     lane
"Stop" sign
One-way operation




                                                                                                            driveway
                                                                                                driveway




                                                                                                                       driveway
                                                                                                     lane
                                          driveway
TTC stop
Three-hour parking
permitted, subject to
peak period
prohibitions
Parking not permitted
                                                                                                                                             driveway
Approximate number
of parking spaces                                                                                                                            driveway

provided
DRAWING NOT TO SCALE




                                                                                                                                  driveway

                                                                                                                                  driveway


                            future                                                                                                driveway

                          connection



                                                                                                                                             driveway (Price Chopper)
                                                                                                                                  driveway   lane




                                                                                                                                  driveway




                              gr                                                                                                                                 future
                                   ad                                                                                                                         connection to
                                        e-
                                          se                                                                                                                    Sudbury
                                                     pa
                                                          ra                                                                                                     Street
                                                            te
                                                                 d
                                                                     ra
                                                                        i   lc
                                                                                 ro
                                                                                    ss
                                                                                       in
                                                                                            g




Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                        Parking Demand Survey
·   A parking demand survey was undertaken on Peel Avenue and Gladstone
    Avenue on Wednesday March 11 and Thursday March 12, 2009 during the
    busiest 8-hour period between 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
·   The parking demand survey identified the location and number of vehicles
    that parked along Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel
    Avenue and Queen Street West. The data was recorded in half-hour
    intervals.
·   The following summarizes the results of the survey:
    Peel Avenue (North Side):
                                                        Average No. of Legal   Average No. of
                                 No. of Legal Parking
    Time                                                  Parking Spaces       Illegal Parking
                                  Spaces Available
                                                              Utilized         Spaces Utilized
    7:30   a.m. ­   9:00 a.m.             9                       7                    0
    9:00   a.m. ­   12:00 p.m.            9                       5                    0
    1:00   p.m. ­   3:00 p.m.             9                       6                    0
    4:00   p.m. ­   6:00 p.m.             0                     N/A                    0

    Peel Avenue (South Side):
                                                        Average No. of Legal   Average No. of
                                 No. of Legal Parking
    Time                                                  Parking Spaces       Illegal Parking
                                  Spaces Available
                                                              Utilized         Spaces Utilized
    7:30   a.m. ­   9:00 a.m.             0                     N/A                    0
    9:00   a.m. ­   12:00 p.m.            8                       1                    0
    1:00   p.m. ­   3:00 p.m.             8                       2                    0
    4:00   p.m. ­   6:00 p.m.             8                       6                    1

    Gladstone Avenue (West Side):
                                                        Average No. of Legal   Average No. of
                                 No. of Legal Parking
    Time                                                  Parking Spaces       Illegal Parking
                                  Spaces Available
                                                              Utilized         Spaces Utilized
    7:30   a.m. ­   9:00 a.m.             0                     N/A                    0
    9:00   a.m. ­   12:00 p.m.           11                       7                    0
    1:00   p.m. ­   3:00 p.m.            11                      11                    0
    4:00   p.m. ­   6:00 p.m.             0                     N/A                    0

    Gladstone Avenue (East Side):
                                                        Average No. of Legal   Average No. of
                                 No. of Legal Parking
    Time                                                  Parking Spaces       Illegal Parking
                                  Spaces Available
                                                              Utilized         Spaces Utilized
    7:30   a.m. ­   9:00 a.m.             0                     N/A                    0
    9:00   a.m. ­   12:00 p.m.            0                     N/A                    1
    1:00   p.m. ­   3:00 p.m.             0                     N/A                    1
    4:00   p.m. ­   6:00 p.m.             0                     N/A                    1




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
    Current Applications and Approvals

                                             Study
                                           Focus Area




· As shown in the above plan, the City has received several development
  applications for the area surrounding Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue,
  particularly in the West Queen West triangle.
· The area is undergoing great change on its way to becoming a mixed use
  community with condominiums, affordable housing, artist live/work units,
  galleries, retail uses and new park spaces. One of the community benefits
  that has been secured for the community includes the relocation of Toronto
  Public Health to allow for the re-use of the Carnegie Library as an Arts Hub.
· One of the approved developments (subject to minor conditions) is located
  on the northwest corner of Queen Street West and Gladstone Avenue (No. 2
  Gladstone Avenue). This development includes an eight-storey mixed use
  (residential/commercial) building. As part of the approval, the developer is
  required to provide streetscape features on Gladstone Avenue, adjacent to
  this property.




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
        Transportation & Public Realm
                Opportunity
·   Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are currently designed
    to accommodate through traffic, including TTC buses from
    Dufferin Street.

·   As a result of the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination project,
    traffic will no longer need to divert onto Peel Avenue and
    Gladstone Avenue and as such, traffic volumes are expected
    to decrease on these roads.

·   Due to the expected decrease in traffic volumes, Peel
    Avenue and Gladstone Avenue could be converted from
    minor arterial roadways to local roadways.

·   The parking demand survey indicates that although the
    demand for parking on Peel Avenue is not high, parking on
    Gladstone Avenue is being fully utilized, particularly during
    the afternoon off-peak period.

·   With increased development, there will likely be an increase
    in demand of parking spaces in this area. This could be
    achieved through the redesign of Peel Avenue and
    Gladstone Avenue.

·   The planned reconstruction of Peel Avenue and Gladstone
    Avenue provides an opportunity to improve the public realm
    of the boulevard spaces (ie. streetscaping, street furniture)
    through the redesign of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue
    to accommodate to future conditions.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
              Identifying Alternatives
·   Having defined the problem to be addressed, the next step in
    the Class EA process is to develop a reasonable range of
    alternative solutions. The following alternative solutions were
    developed:

·   Alternative 1: Do Nothing (reconstruct with existing roadway
    cross-section width of approximately 13.1 m).

·   Alternative 2: Narrow roadway by approximately 2.1 m and
    provide single lane in each direction of travel with parallel
    parking on both sides of roadway.

·   Alternative 3: Narrow roadway by approximately 4.3 metres
    and provide single lane in each direction of travel with
    parallel parking on one side only.

·   Alternative 4: Narrow roadway by approximately 4.5 m and
    convert Gladstone Avenue and Peel Avenue to operate one-
    way in the northbound and westbound direction,
    respectively, and provide parallel parking on both sides of
    roadway.

·   Alternative 5: Narrow roadway by approximately 3.7 m and
    convert Gladstone Avenue and Peel Avenue to operate one-
    way in the northbound and westbound direction,
    respectively, and provide angle parking.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
      Common Elements of Alternative
               Solutions
·   With the exception of Alternative 1 (Do Nothing), all of the
    alternatives developed include the same roadway
    configuration on Gladstone Avenue, between the Price
    Chopper Driveway and Queen Street West. This includes the
    following elements:

    1. A roadway cross-section of approximately
      8.6 m.

    2. One northbound lane and one southbound lane.

    3. Parking prohibited on both sides of the
      roadway.

    4. Boulevard width of approximately 5.7 metres.

    5. Single row of trees provided on each side of the
      roadway.

·   The configuration of all other sections of Gladstone Avenue
    and Peel Avenue differ between each of the alternatives
    developed.

·   For all alternatives, the intersection of Peel Avenue and
    Gladstone Avenue is proposed to be all-way stop controlled.

    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                      Alternative 1


    Do Nothing (reconstruct with existing roadway
     cross-section width of approximately 13.1 m)




·   No change to existing cross-section and roadway
    configuration.
·   A total of approximately 28 parking spaces provided.
·   Boulevard width of approximately 3.4 metres.
·   Limited opportunity to improve public realm.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                      Alternative 2


    Narrow roadway by approximately 2.1 metres




·   Single lane in each direction of travel with parallel
    parking provided on both sides of roadway.
·   A total of approximately 49 `Pay & Display' parking
    spaces provided.
·   Boulevard width of approximately 4.5 metres.
·   Single row of trees provided on each side of roadway.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                       Alternative 3


    Narrow roadway by approximately 4.3 metres




·    Single lane in each direction of travel with parallel
     parking provided on one side of roadway (north side
     of Peel Avenue and east side of Gladstone Avenue).
·    A total of approximately 25 `Pay & Display' parking
     spaces provided.
·    Boulevard width of approximately 5.6 meters.
·    Double row of trees provided where possible (subject
     to utility locations and detailed design).



     Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                      Alternative 4


       Narrow roadway by approximately 4.5 m




·   Single northbound lane on Gladstone Avenue and
    single westbound lane on Peel Avenue (one-way
    operation).
·   Parallel parking provided on both sides of roadway.
·   A total of approximately 43 `Pay & Display' parking
    spaces provided.
·   Boulevard width of approximately 5.7 meters.
·   Double row of trees provided where possible (subject
    to utility locations and detailed design).


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                      Alternative 5

       Narrow roadway by approximately 3.7 m




·   Single northbound lane on Gladstone Avenue and
    single westbound lane on Peel Avenue (one-way
    operation).
·   Angle parking provided on one side of roadway (north
    side of Peel Avenue and west side of Gladstone
    Avenue).
·   A total of approximately 51 `Pay & Display' parking
    spaces provided.
·   Boulevard width of approximately 5.3 meters.
·   Single row of trees provided on each side of roadway.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
        Approximate Number of Parking
               Spaces Provided
Peel Avenue:
              Existing Alternative Alternative Alternative Alternative Alternative
Segment      Conditions     1           2           3           4           5
North Side       9           9          12          12          10          24

South Side       8           8           7          0           8           0

Sub-Total       17          17          19          12          18          24



Gladstone Avenue:
              Existing Alternative Alternative Alternative Alternative Alternative
Segment      Conditions     1           2           3           4           5
West Side        11        11          15           0          12          27

East Side        0           0          15          13          13          0

Sub-Total       11          11          30          13          25          27



              Existing Alternative Alternative Alternative Alternative Alternative
TOTAL        Conditions     1           2           3           4           5
                28          28          49          25         43          51

Note: Additional parking spaces may be achieved through the consolidation of
existing driveways for future developments.




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
        Approximate Width of Boulevard
               Space Provided

                                               Width of Boulevard*
Roadway            Existing    Alternative   Alternative   Alternative   Alternative   Alternative
                  Conditions        1             2             3             4             5

Peel Avenue         3.4 m        3.4 m         4.5 m         5.6 m         5.7 m         5.3 m
Gladstone
Avenue (Peel
Avenue to Price     3.4 m        3.4 m         4.5 m         5.6 m         5.7 m         5.3 m
Chopper
Driveway
Gladstone
Avenue (Price
Chopper
                    3.4 m        3.4 m         5.7 m         5.7 m         5.7 m         5.7 m
Driveway to
Queen Street
West)
* Assumes equal width of both boulevards, actual width to be confirmed in detailed design




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                  Evaluation Criteria
Each alternative solution is evaluated against a broad range of
evaluation criteria that help to determine how well each solution
addresses the opportunity, and identifies the potential impacts.
The following criteria will be used:
         Transportation
         - Traffic conditions
         - Overall safety and service
         - Cyclist, pedestrian, transit and emergency
           services impacts
         Socio-Economic Environment
         - Residential, commercial and access impacts
         - On-street parking
         - Effects on special needs of residents
         - Noise and vibration
         - Traffic Infiltration
         - Urban design / aesthetics
         Natural Environment
         - Vegetation, wildlife, stormwater and air quality
         Cultural
         - Archaeological
         - Built Heritage
         Engineering and Cost
         - Engineering
         - Maintenance
         - Cost
Once alternatives are analyzed, they will be ranked according to
their relative preference.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                       Next Steps


1. Receive comments from the public ­ June 9,
   2009
2. Evaluate Alternative Solutions based on
   Evaluation Criteria.
3. Determine the Preliminary Preferred Solution
   based on Evaluation and comments received.
4. Consult with Public at 2nd Public Open House ­
   September 2009.
5. Obtain City of Toronto Council Approval ­ Fall
   2009.
6. Issue Notice of Study Completion and
   commence a minimum 30-day period for public
   review ­ Fall 2009




   Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                                         Thank You

Your comments and concerns are important to us!

  Please complete a comment sheet and place it in the box
     provided or mail it back to us. Your comments will be
  considered in the assessment of the alternative solutions for
     reconstructing Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue.

                                Questions? Please Contact:

                                      Christine Paglialunga
                                 Public Consultation Coordinator
                                        Tel: 416-338-2400
                                       Fax: 416-392-2974
                                   Email: cpaglia@toronto.ca


         Please submit all comments by June 9, 2009.

                    Keep updated!
You can find any new information about the project by
             accessing the city's website:
            http://www.toronto.ca/involved/
Comments and information regarding this study are being collected to assist the City of Toronto in meeting the requirements
of the Environmental Assessment Act. This material will be maintained on file for use during the study and may be included in
     study documentation. With the exception of personal information all documents will become part of the public record.




  Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                                                                     Municipal Class Environmental Assessment
                                                                                 Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction

                                                COMMENT SHEET
                                       Public Open House #1 ­ May 26, 2009
Background
The City of Toronto has initiated a Municipal Class Environmental Assessment Study to review the feasibility of changing the
design of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, and evaluate alternative methods
to address this.

Once the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project is complete, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue will no longer need to
accommodate through traffic on Dufferin Street and traffic volumes on these roads are expected to decrease. In addition, with the
planned reconstruction of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, there is an opportunity to modify the design of these roadways and
improve the boulevard space to accommodate to future conditions.

The City of Toronto is interested in your comments regarding this project. Please take a few minutes to complete this comment
sheet. All comments will be considered.


Question 1.
Five proposed alternatives have been developed. Do you have any comments regarding the proposed alternatives? Please
explain.

Proposed Alternatives                                           Comments/Suggestions


Alternative 1: Do Nothing
(reconstruct with existing
roadway cross-section
width.



Alternative 2: Narrow
roadway and provide
single lane in each
direction of travel with
parallel parking on both
sides of roadway.

Alternative 3: Narrow
roadway and provide
single lane in each
direction of travel with
parallel parking on one
side only.


                                                                                                                        1
Alternative 4: Narrow
roadway and convert
Gladstone Avenue and
Peel Avenue to operate
one-way and provide
parallel parking on both
sides of roadway.

Alternative 5: Narrow
roadway and convert
Gladstone Avenue and
Peel Avenue to operate
one-way and provide
angle parking.


Question 2.
Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are located in a mixed residential and commercial area, which is a vibrant arts and cultural
destination. Recognizing the unique character of this neighborhood, the project team is trying to balance all of the interests of this
community.
Please indicate the level of importance of each of these uses/features to you and/or your community.
2 = Very Important                            1 = Somewhat Important                              0 = Not
                                                                                                  Important
                               Importance                                         Comments
  Uses/Features
                           2       1        0


Pedestrian



Cycling



Automobile



Parking


Green Space (ie.
trees, Sod, etc.)



Street Furniture (ie.
benches, bicycle
rings, etc.)



                                                                                                                            2
Other (please
explain)


Question 3.
The proposed alternatives were evaluated using the following Criteria:
 Transportation                    Socio-Economic                       Natural Environment        Cultural                   Economic
 · Traffic Conditions              · Impacts on residential and         ·   Vegetation             · Archaeological            · Engineering
 · Safety and Service                commercial access                  ·   Wildlife               · Built Heritage            · Maintenance
 · Impacts on pedestrians,         · On-street parking                  ·   Stormwater             Features                    · Cost
    cyclists, and public           · Effects of special needs of        ·   Air Quality
    transit                          residents
 · Impacts on Emergency            · Noise and Vibration
    Services                       · Traffic Infiltration
                                   · Urban Design/Aesthetics
Do you think that all the appropriate evaluation criteria were considered? Are there other criteria you would like considered in the
evaluation?




Question 4.
Do you have any other comments on this study?




Thank you for participating in this study.
For more information about this project, please visit our website at www.toronto.ca/involved. Please return this completed Comment Sheet to
our staff at the Registration Table or place in the `In Box'. You can also fax it or use the provided postage paid envelope to mail the form in by
June 9, 2009 to:

Christine Paglialunga                             Telephone: 416-338-2400
Public Consultation Co-ordinator                  Fax: 416-392-2974
City of Toronto                                   Email: cpaglia@toronto.ca
Metro Hall, 19th Floor
55 John Street
Toronto, Ontario M5V 3C6
Comments and information regarding this project are being collected under the City of Toronto Act, 2006 and by-law 603-2007 for the purpose of
meeting environmental assessment requirements. With the exception of personal information, all comments will become a part of the public record.
Questions about the collection of your information should be addressed to Ms. Christine Paglialunga, Public Consultation Coordinator, City of
                           th
Toronto, 55 John Street, 19 Floor, Metro Hall, Toronto, Ontario, M5V 3C6, Telephone: 416-338-2400, Fax: 416-392-2974, email:
cpaglia@toronto.ca


                                                                                                                                        3
Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
Municipal Class Environmental Assessment
Summary of Public Comments - May 26, 2009

Question 1: Alternatives
                                          Alternative 1                                  Alternative 2                              Alternative 3                                 Alternative 4                                  Alternative 5

                           Don't like it, does not convert arterials into                                              Looks Good, I am in favour of one-way                                                           Angled parking is awkward and
            1                                                                                  N/A                                                                                 Looks Good
                                     typical residential street                                                                       streets                                                                            unnecessary, don't like it



                                                                                                                                                                   This is my favourite, but I would like to see
            2                                   N/A                                            N/A                                       N/A                         one boulevard and one bike lane as I                             N/A
                                                                                                                                                                          would like to see a lot of bikes




                                                                                                                                                                     Prefer this one the most, especially the
            3                                   N/A                                            N/A                                       N/A                                                                                          N/A
                                                                                                                                                                   double row of trees and parking availability




                                                                              Appears to be the best alternative,                                                     Very opposed to this alternative, as a        Again, we do not want any more one-
                            Lack of parking for expected increase in                                                   Second best alternative, because of the
                                                                             ensures parking and most importantly                                                  resident of Gladstone Ave., we do not want        way streets, angle parking does not
            4               density of neighbourhood, especially for                                                     dual direction, room for cyclists, a
                                                                              retains dual direction on Gladstone                                                         more one-way streets in our               seem safe for the many cyclists and
                                           Gladstone                                                                         measured level of parking
                                                                            Ave.. This is the most important feature                                                     neighbourhood, we want fewer.                    small children in the area



                                                                                Do not think its necessary in this                                                 This one is great, ample parking with more
            5                                   N/A                           location to provide car travel in both        Same comment as previous               opportunity to improve the public realm, i.e.                      N/A
                                                                                             direction                                                                          double row of trees



                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MVs still number 1, but mitigated to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      some degree by making one-ways.
                                                                            Makes the needs of Motorized Vehicles                                                      MV issues still #1 priority. No more
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Shows the most concern for pedestrian
                                                                              (MVs) the priority over pedestrian    Motorized Vehicles and their issues still #1     pedestrian concerns than Alts 2 and 3,
            6                  Better than alternatives 2, 3, and 4                                                                                                                                                  issues single row of trees both sides.
                                                                             concerns; single row of threes is a    issue; more pedestrian benefits than Alt. 2      since it says double row of trees where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Makes it a little safer for pedestrians,
                                                                            pedestrian concern, but still after MVs                                                                  possible
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   one-ways and stop signs in all-directions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      is best




                           Not bad, as this is to become an extension                                                                                               One-way is not advisable as it will really
                                                                             Okay, traffic in both directions good,    Okay, traffic in both directions is good,
            7              of Sudbury Street, so there will be sufficient                                                                                          provide a problem as per the continuation          As above, one way is unadvisable
                                                                                       less parking is ok                  less parking is less fortunate
                                 traffic and demand for parking                                                                                                                   of Sudbury



            8                                   N/A                                            N/A                                       N/A                                           N/A                                            N/A


                           No bike lanes considered, underused street                                               No bike lanes considered, not sure of            No bike lanes considered, advantage of        No bike lanes considered, angle parking
                                                                          No bike lanes considered, like increased
            9              in terms of potential: green, traffic calming,                                          advantage of two rows of trees, like the           more parking and more green space            is interesting but what would it do to the
                                                                               parking -- needed in this area
                                    improving neighbourhood                                                            idea of increased green space                               considered                        businesses and residential properties
Question 2: Uses and                Pedestrian                                  Cycling                           Automobile                                Parking                              Green Space                         Street Furniture                          Other
features               Importance            Comments              Importance          Comments         Importance         Comments            Importance             Comments          Importance        Comments          Importance           Comments            Importance      Comments
            1              2                   N/A                     1                 N/A                1                                      0                    N/A                 2                N/A                1                    N/A                N/A
            2              2                   N/A                     2                 N/A                1                                      1                    N/A                 2                N/A                2                    N/A                N/A

                                                                                                                       Lots of options for                                                           The whole are needs
                                         Especially with the                        Everyone in this                                                          Area attracts a lot of                                                     Bike rings are great, the
                                                                                                                     getting around, mostly                                                               a lot more
           3               2            grocery store on the           2          neighbourhood rides       0                                      1         outsiders for dining and       2                                   1         more the merrier and          N/A
                                                                                                                       has to provide for                                                              greenspace and
                                              corner                                    a bike                                                                      shopping                                                                they help business
                                                                                                                          grocery store                                                                      trees




                                                                                   Many cyclists use                                                                                                 The green space we
                                                                                                                       As a local resident I
                                          We have a lot of                        Gladstone, which I                                                              There is amble                     have now is not well
                                                                                                                     find access to my own
                                      sidewalks, so this is not                   encourage, the stop                                                         residential parking but                    maintained,                       This is a cyclist area,
                                                                                                                       house on Gladstone
           4               1            a large concern, and           2           sign at cross and        2                                      0         not enough commercial          2         especially garbage        2           and more rings are          N/A
                                                                                                                     to be difficult because
                                      foot traffic is not heavy                      Gladstone (on                                                           parking close to queen                    clean-up, so will                        encouraged
                                                                                                                        of the many one-
                                       north of price chopper                     Gladstone) is often                                                                  street                            adding more
                                                                                                                              ways.
                                                                                    ignored by cars                                                                                                     improve that?




                                                                                                                                                                   Mainly only to
                                                                                                                                                                accommodate the
                                                                                                                                                             residents and friends of
           5               2              Very important               1                 N/A                0                 N/A                  1           the new buildings at         2               N/A                 2                   N/A                 N/A
                                                                                                                                                              Gladstone, but overall
                                                                                                                                                                  this is the least
                                                                                                                                                                 important feature




                                      Alternatives 2 - 5 are all
                                       making MV issues #1
                                      priority. Price Chopper
                                          does not require
                                         additional parking.
                                      Seems that commercial                                                                                                                                                                               Boulevard size, trees
           6               2          interests (especially the        0                 N/A                0                 N/A                  0                                        2                                   2         and benches must be           N/A
                                        Gladstone Hotel and                                                                                                                                                                               the priority over MVs
                                       new development) are
                                      driving 2 - 4 especially!.
                                       Better Alt1 than 2 - 4,
                                       Modify Alt 5 and it will
                                        become best priority.




                                          This street is not
                                           heavily used by
           7               1           pedestrians at present          2                                    2                                      1                    N/A                 1               N/A                 1                   N/A                 N/A
                                         it's not Queen St,
                                         hardly any sprawl

           8              N/A                   N/A                   N/A                N/A               N/A                N/A                 N/A                   N/A                N/A               N/A               N/A                  N/A                 N/A

                                            All of these
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Design! How
                                         considerations are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   will the street
                                       present and important
           9               2                                           2                                    2                                      2                                        2                                   2                                        2         function and
                                      schemes must allow for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     feel - not
                                           all these to be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     included.
                                        considered together
Question 3: Criteria
            1                                                                                                                             N/A
            2                                                                                                                             N/A
            3                                                                                                                             N/A
            4                                                                                                                             N/A
            5                                                                                                                             N/A
            6                                                                    Yes, but, the priorities are totally incorrect, MVs should be a Distant second to pedestrian safety and comfort issues
            7                                                                                                                             N/A
            8                                                                                                                             N/A
            9                   A cyclist was killed at Gladstone and Queen in 2005, cycling is not present at all in these recommendations. Secondly, the "life" of the street does not seem to be addressed in this study, there is SO much potential.


Question 4: General Comments
            1                                                                                                                             N/A
            2                                                                                                                             N/A
            3                                                                                                              Thanks for letting us Comment!
            4                                                                                                                             N/A
            5                                                                                                                             N/A
            6                                   Toronto once again makes MVs the issue over pedestrians. Be a pedestrian in this city for 7 consecutive days in this city and see for yourself. Wake up Miller and the rest of Council

            7                                      I just thank that the impact of the Sudbury extension changes the whole equation. There are already considerable one-way streets in the area and its problematic getting around

            8                            The agent at the meeting said nothing was planned for the tunnel to lower the noise level. The traffic noise on Dufferin St. between Queen and King is bad now, the noise in the tunnel will be awful.

                         I believe that some sort of charette or community design consultation should have been considered. There is so much room for consensus building in this. I fear the direction will be decided by september when the next meeting is
                                                schedule. Please consider this. You have everything to gain from teh process. How does the public make alternative suggestions? Will these be the alternatives offered in September?
                                                                        1. What are the objectives from teh City and from the neighbourhood from this re-design? Not answered in purpose and background section.
            9                                                   2. In considering extra parking or extra green space, what key factors are heloing the city and teh community make that decision, how is this being recorded?
                                                                                   3. Queen West lacks green space and safe biking access. what studies have been used in this EA to comment on that?
                                                               4. Gladstone and Peel both have residential and commercial uses, what studies or information has been gathered to address the needs of these communities.
                                                      I am extremely pleased that the city is taking on this study and considering allocating capital funds to its improvement. Please consider a more inclusive process - we can help!
               Appendix D
Public Open House #2 and Summary of
                          Comments
The City of Toronto holds public consultations as one way to engage residents in the life of their city. Toronto thrives on your great ideas
and actions. We invite you to get involved.


Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
 Municipal Class Environmental Assessment
 Notice of Public Open House
Public Consultation:
We invite you to attend the second Public Open House to learn about the work completed to date and the next steps in
this process. Details are as follows:
   Date: Monday, November 16, 2009
   Time: 6:00 p.m. ­ 8:00 p.m.
Location: St. John's Cathedral, 186 Cowan Avenue
The second Open House will present information on




                                                                                                                                                                     DOVE
(1) study background, (2) evaluation of the alternative
solutions, (3) the preliminary preferred solution, (4)




                                                                                                                                                                      RCOU
                                                                                 DUNDAS ST
how feedback from the May 2009 meeting has been                                            W




                                                                                                                                                                          RT R
incorporated and (5) next steps in the process. Staff
                                                                          II




                                                                                                                                                                                    OSSI
                                                                             II




                                                                                                                                                 GLAD




                                                                                                                                                                               D
will be available to answer your questions and concerns,
                                                                                                                                      DUFF
                                                                                II




                                                                                  II
                                                                                   I




                                                                                     II




                                                                                                                                                                                     NGTO
and receive your comments.                                                              II                                                         STON
                                                                                                                                         ERIN


                                                                                           II
                                                                                              II
                                                                                                 II




                                                                                                                                                                                      N AV
                                                                                       LAND




                                                                                                    II
Background
                                                                                                                                                      E AVE

                                                                                                       II
                                                                                                                                            ST



                                                                                                          II
                                                                                                             II
Construction for the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination                                                            II




                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                         SDOW




                                                                                                                   II
                                                                                                                      II
                                                                                                                         II
project is currently underway and will result in an                                                                         II

                                                                                                                                                                                       N ST
                                                                                                                               II
                                                                                                                                                               AVE
                                                                                                                       BROC




                                                                                                                                  II
                                                                                                                                                    PEEL                           QUEE
                                                                                            NE A




underpass which will connect Dufferin Street from
                                                                                                                                     II
                                                                                                                                        II
                                                                                                                                           II
                                                                                                                                              II
Queen Street West to Peel Avenue.
                                                                                                VE




                                                                                                                          K AVE




                                                                                                                                                 II
                                                                                                                                                    II
                                                                                                                                                       II
                                                                                                                                                          I   II
Once completed, Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue             LEGEND                      II
                                                                                            I I I
                                                                                                  I I I

(between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West) will             N                                          I I I
                                                                                                              I I I I
                                                                                                                      I I I I I I I
                                                                                                                                    I I I I I I I I I I
                                                                                                                                                        I I I I I I I I
                                                             Study Boundary
no longer need to accommodate Dufferin Street traf c.                                                       T
                                                             Study Focus                                  S
There is an opportunity now to redesign these roads                                            KING              0                                          484m
as a result of the expected decrease in traf c volumes.
This study is being undertaken in accordance with the planning and design process for `Schedule B' projects as outlined
in the Municipal Engineers Association Municipal Class Environmental Assessment process (amended in 2007).
We would like to hear from you
If you are unable to attend the meeting but would like to be provided with information or would like to be added to the
study mailing list, please contact:
Maogosha Pyjor                                  Tel: 416-338-2850
Public Consultation Coordinator                 Fax: 416-392-2974
City of Toronto                                 TTY: 416-397-0831
Metro Hall, 19th Floor                          mpyjor@toronto.ca
55 John Street,Toronto, ON M5V 3C6              toronto.ca/involved/projects
Issue Date: Friday November 12, 2009

Information will be collected in accordance with the Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. With the
exception of personal information, all comments will become part of the public record.
                      Welcome


     Public Open House No. 2


Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
 Environmental Assessment
            Study

           Municipal Class EA



 Please sign in so that we can
keep you updated on this study


Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                 Study Area Map




                                    LEGEND
                            North

                            Study Boundary

                            Study Focus




Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
             Purpose and Background

·   Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue
    and Queen Street West, are minor arterial roadways that
    accommodate through traffic from Dufferin Street due to the
    discontinuity of Dufferin Street between Peel Avenue and
    Queen Street West.

·   Due to the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination Project, Peel
    Avenue and Gladstone Avenue will no longer need to
    accommodate through traffic on Dufferin Street and traffic
    volumes on these roads are expected to decrease.

·   The purpose of this study is to conduct an Environmental
    Assessment to review the feasibility of changing the design
    of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel
    Avenue and Queen Street West, and evaluate alternative
    methods to address this.

·   The purpose of tonight's Public Open House is to present:

    - Study activities since the first Public Open House
    - Results of the evaluation of the alternative solutions
    - Preferred Solution
    - Comments received from the May 2009 meeting
    - Mitigating measures for Preferred Solution




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
           Environmental Assessment

·   An Environmental Assessment (EA) Study is required
    for certain roadway alterations under the EA Act. The
    Act requires that a reasonable range of alternatives
    be developed and that all aspects of each alternative
    be assessed and evaluated to determine the impact
    on the environment. The criteria used to evaluate
    each alternative includes:
     ­ Transportation
     ­ Socio-Economic Environment
     ­ Natural Environment
     ­ Cultural
     ­ Engineering and Cost

·   The EA Act also requires that the public be consulted
    during the EA process.

·   This study is being conducted in accordance with the
    requirements of the Municipal Class EA for Schedule
    B projects. The following board illustrates the major
    steps in completing this process.




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
            The Class EA Process
          Phase 1
Define Problem / Opportunity


            Phase 2
 Identify Alternative Solutions         Public Open House
                                               No. 1
Evaluate Solutions and Identify           May 26, 2009
      Preferred Solution
                                        Public Open House
                                               No. 2
   Refine Preferred Solution            November 16, 2009
    Based on Comments



  Document Findings in the
       Project File
                                           City of Toronto
                                          Council Approval
    30-Day Review Period


        Implementation



 Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
       Existing Plan and Cross-Section
Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue:




     3.4 m               Approximately 13.1 m (varies)     3.4 m




·   The right-of-way identifies the property owned by the City
    of Toronto to provide roadways, sidewalks, boulevards
    and other public uses.
·   The rights-of-way on Peel Avenue and Gladstone
    Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West,
    are approximately 20 metres each.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                  Existing Operating Conditions


                                                                4PM - 6PM, MON - FRI


                                                                      12:01AM - 7AM,
                                                                    EXCEPT BY PERMIT
    PEEL AVENUE &
  GLADSTONE AVENUE
- 50 km/h speed limit;
-classified as minor arterial
roadways;
-12,000 vehicles daily;
-TTC service provided by the
29 Dufferin bus;
-sidewalks on both sides;                                       7AM - 9AM, MON - FRI
and
                                                                  12:01AM - 7AM,
                                                                EXCEPT BY PERMIT                                     4PM -
-pavement is approximately                                                                                            6PM,
13.1 metres wide.                                                                                                   MON - FRI




                                                                                          7AM - 9AM, MON - FRI


                                                                                          4PM - 6PM, MON - FRI



                                                                                                                     4PM -
           LEGEND                                                                                                     6PM,
                                                                                                                    MON - FRI
       Traffic control signals
       "Stop" sign
                                   future
       One-way operation
                                 connection
       Laning
       TTC stop
       No Parking
                                                                               7AM - 9AM, MON - FRI
       No Standing
                                                                                                                     4PM -
                                                                               4PM - 6PM, MON - FRI
                                                                                                                      6PM,
       No  Stopping
        DRAWING NOT TO SCALE
                                                                                                                    MON - FRI




                                                                                                                    future
                                       gr                                                                        connection to
                                            ad
                                                 e-                                                                Sudbury
                                                   se
                                                        pa                                                          Street
                                                             ra
                                                               te
                                                                    d
                                                                        ra
                                                                           i   lc
                                                                                    ro
                                                                                       ss
                                                                                          in
                                                                                               g




      Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
       Existing Peak Hour Traffic Volumes




                                                                                                                                  100 (74)
                                 389 (319)




                                                                                                                     4 (5)
                                              264 (408)




LEGEND




                                                                                                                                                       242 (407)
       Right Turn
       Through
       Left Turn


 00 Weekday AM
 (00) Weekday PM




                                               future
                                                                                                                                                                   21 (28)
                                             connection
                                                                                                                                                                   20 (38)
                                                                                                                                                256 (368)
                                                                                                                                                              22 (52)
                                                                                                                      249 (203)
                                                                                                                                    135 (134)




                                                                                                                                                             89 (132)


                                                                                                                184 (280)                                                       future
                                                    gr
                                                         ad                                                                                                                  connection to
                                                              e-                                                                                                               Sudbury
                                                                se
                                                                     pa                                                                                                         Street
                                                                          ra
                                                                            te
                                                                                 d
                                                                                     ra
                                                                                        i   lc
                                                                                                 ro
                                                                                                    ss
                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                            g

* Counts were undertaken on Wednesday March 11 & Thursday March 12, 2009




      Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
              Existing Parking Availability



   LEGEND
Traffic control signals




                                                      lane




                                                                                                           lane
"Stop" sign
One-way operation




                                                                                                driveway


                                                                                                                  driveway
                                          driveway




                                                                                                                             driveway
                                                                                                           lane
TTC stop
Three-hour parking
permitted, subject to
peak period
prohibitions
Parking not permitted
                                                                                                                                                   driveway
Approximate number
of parking spaces                                                                                                                                  driveway

provided
DRAWING NOT TO SCALE




                                                                                                                                        driveway

                                                                                                                                        driveway


                            future                                                                                                      driveway

                          connection



                                                                                                                                                   driveway (Price Chopper)
                                                                                                                                        driveway   lane




                                                                                                                                        driveway




                               gr                                                                                                                                      future
                                    ad                                                                                                                              connection to
                                         e-
                                           se                                                                                                                         Sudbury
                                                     pa
                                                          ra                                                                                                           Street
                                                            te
                                                                 d
                                                                     ra
                                                                        i   lc
                                                                                 ro
                                                                                    ss
                                                                                       in
                                                                                            g




Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
               Parking Demand Survey
·   A parking demand survey was undertaken on Peel Avenue and Gladstone
    Avenue on Wednesday March 11 and Thursday March 12, 2009 during the
    busiest 8-hour period between 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
·   The parking demand survey identified the location and number of vehicles
    that parked along Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel
    Avenue and Queen Street West. The data was recorded in half-hour
    intervals.
·   The following summarizes the results of the survey:




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
    Current Applications and Approvals

                                             Study
                                           Focus Area




· As shown in the above plan, the City has received several development
  applications for the area surrounding Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue,
  particularly in the West Queen West triangle.
· The area is undergoing great change on its way to becoming a mixed use
  community with condominiums, affordable housing, artist live/work units,
  galleries, retail uses and new park spaces. One of the community benefits
  that has been secured for the community includes the relocation of Toronto
  Public Health to allow for the re-use of the Carnegie Library as an Arts Hub.
· One of the approved developments is located on the northwest corner of
  Queen Street West and Gladstone Avenue (No. 2 Gladstone Avenue). This
  development includes an eight-storey mixed use (residential/commercial)
  building. As part of the approval, the developer is required to provide
  streetscape features on Gladstone Avenue, adjacent to this property.




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
        Transportation & Public Realm
                Opportunity
·   Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue are currently designed
    to accommodate through traffic, including TTC buses from
    Dufferin Street.

·   As a result of the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination project,
    traffic will no longer need to divert onto Peel Avenue and
    Gladstone Avenue and as such, traffic volumes are expected
    to decrease on these roads.

·   Due to the expected decrease in traffic volumes, Peel
    Avenue and Gladstone Avenue could be converted from
    minor arterial roadways to local roadways.

·   The parking demand survey indicates that although the
    demand for parking on Peel Avenue is not high, parking on
    Gladstone Avenue is being fully utilized, particularly during
    the afternoon off-peak period.

·   With increased development, there will likely be an increase
    in demand of parking spaces in this area. This could be
    achieved through the redesign of Peel Avenue and
    Gladstone Avenue.

·   The planned reconstruction of Peel Avenue and Gladstone
    Avenue provides an opportunity to improve the public realm
    of the boulevard spaces (ie. streetscaping, street furniture)
    through the redesign of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue
    to accommodate to future conditions.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
     Alternative Solutions Considered

·   Alternative 1: Do Nothing (reconstruct with existing roadway
    cross-section width of approximately 13.1 m).

·   Alternative 2: Narrow roadway by approximately 2.1 m and
    provide single lane in each direction of travel with parallel
    parking on both sides of roadway.

·   Alternative 3: Narrow roadway by approximately 4.3 metres
    and provide single lane in each direction of travel with
    parallel parking on one side only.

·   Alternative 4: Narrow roadway by approximately 4.5 m and
    convert Gladstone Avenue and Peel Avenue to operate one-
    way in the northbound and westbound direction,
    respectively, and provide parallel parking on both sides of
    roadway.

·   Alternative 5: Narrow roadway by approximately 3.7 m and
    convert Gladstone Avenue and Peel Avenue to operate one-
    way in the northbound and westbound direction,
    respectively, and provide angle parking.




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
      Common Elements of Alternative
               Solutions
·   With the exception of Alternative 1 ("Do Nothing"), all of the
    alternatives developed include the same roadway
    configuration on Gladstone Avenue, between the Price
    Chopper Driveway and Queen Street West. This includes the
    following elements:

    1. A roadway cross-section of approximately
      8.6 m.

    2. One northbound lane and one southbound lane.

    3. Parking prohibited on both sides of the
      roadway.

    4. Boulevard width of approximately 5.7 metres.

    5. Single row of trees provided on each side of the
      roadway.

·   The configuration of all other sections of Gladstone Avenue
    and Peel Avenue differ between each of the alternatives
    developed.

·   For all alternatives, the intersection of Peel Avenue and
    Gladstone Avenue is proposed to be all-way stop controlled.

    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                      Alternative 1


    Do Nothing (reconstruct with existing roadway
     cross-section width of approximately 13.1 m)




·   No change to existing cross-section and roadway
    configuration.
·   A total of approximately 28 parking spaces provided.
·   Boulevard width of approximately 3.4 metres.
·   Limited opportunity to improve public realm.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                      Alternative 2


    Narrow roadway by approximately 2.1 metres




·   Single lane in each direction of travel with parallel
    parking provided on both sides of roadway.
·   A total of approximately 49 `Pay & Display' parking
    spaces provided.
·   Boulevard width of approximately 4.5 metres.
·   Single row of trees provided on each side of roadway.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                       Alternative 3


    Narrow roadway by approximately 4.3 metres




·    Single lane in each direction of travel with parallel
     parking provided on one side of roadway (north side
     of Peel Avenue and east side of Gladstone Avenue).
·    A total of approximately 25 `Pay & Display' parking
     spaces provided.
·    Boulevard width of approximately 5.6 meters.
·    Double row of trees provided where possible (subject
     to utility locations and detailed design).



     Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                      Alternative 4


       Narrow roadway by approximately 4.5 m




·   Single northbound lane on Gladstone Avenue and
    single westbound lane on Peel Avenue (one-way
    operation).
·   Parallel parking provided on both sides of roadway.
·   A total of approximately 43 `Pay & Display' parking
    spaces provided.
·   Boulevard width of approximately 5.7 meters.
·   Double row of trees provided where possible (subject
    to utility locations and detailed design).


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                      Alternative 5

       Narrow roadway by approximately 3.7 m




·   Single northbound lane on Gladstone Avenue and
    single westbound lane on Peel Avenue (one-way
    operation).
·   Angle parking provided on one side of roadway (north
    side of Peel Avenue and west side of Gladstone
    Avenue).
·   A total of approximately 51 `Pay & Display' parking
    spaces provided.
·   Boulevard width of approximately 5.3 meters.
·   Single row of trees provided on each side of roadway.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
             Detailed Evaluation




Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
    Summary of First Public Open House
               Comments
·   First Public Open House was held on May 26, 2009
·   A total of 30 people signed in
·   City received nine comment sheets

Summary of Comments:
· A couple of people favoured Alternative 1 ("Do Nothing")
· No one supported of Alternative 5
· Half of the people who responded were in favour of the one-way
   option and half were opposed (Alternative 4)

·   Based on the comment sheets received, the following list
    indicates the level of importance for the uses and features of
    Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue:
    1. Green Space
    2. Pedestrian
    3. Street Furniture
    4. Cycling
    5. Automobile
    6. Parking

Additional Comments:
· Councillor Adam Giambrone's office has received requests by
   local residents and business owners for additional parking in the
   study area.




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                        Other Issues
Bicycle Lanes:

·   Once the Dufferin Street Jog Elimination project is complete,
    there will be bicycle lanes through the tunnel on Dufferin Street
    between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West.
·   The reconstructed rail corridor has been designed to
    accommodate a future multi-use trail with proposed connections
    at Dufferin Street near Peel Avenue.
·   For the Westend Bikeways Project, an east-west bicycle route
    has been identified on Argyle Street, just north of the study area.
·   Due to the expected decrease in traffic volumes, Peel Avenue
    and Gladstone Avenue could be converted from minor arterial
    roadways to local roadways, which are considered comfortable
    for cyclists and do not require a dedicated facility (ie. bicycle
    lanes).
·   For Alternatives 4 and 5 (one-way operation), cyclists would be
    prohibited from using Peel Avenue in the eastbound direction
    and Gladstone Avenue in the southbound direction.
·   Contra-flow bicycle lanes have been provided for two-way
    bicycle operations on one-way streets. However, it is not
    desirable to provide contra-flow bicycle lanes beside a parking
    lane.
·   Reasonable access to the Argyle Street bicycle route can be
    achieved from Queen Street West in the northbound direction via
    Gladstone Avenue and to Queen Street West in the southbound
    direction via Peel Avenue and Dufferin Street due to the bicycle
    lanes on Dufferin Street between Queen Street West and Peel
    Avenue.



    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                         Other Issues
Bicycle Lanes (continued):

·   Although a contra-flow bicycle lane on Peel Avenue is desirable
    to provide a connection to/from the proposed multi-use trail in the
    rail corridor and the Argyle Street bicycle route, in the short term,
    it is not critical to implement a contra-flow bicycle lane as the
    multi-use trail is not being implemented in the near future.
·   At the time of implementation of the multi-use trail, the need for
    parking and contra-flow bicycle lanes will be re-evaluated.
·   Alternative 4 allows for a contra-flow bicycle lane in the future
    without altering the physical layout of the roadway since the
    required width of a contra-flow bicycle lane is approximately the
    same width as the parking lane, which would have to be
    removed.

Truck Access:

·   The owners of No. 11 Peel Avenue (former Samko Toy
    Warehouse) advised the City that any narrowing of Peel Avenue
    in the vicinity of their driveway would make it impossible for large
    trucks to access their driveway.
·   Through a truck turning movement analysis, City staff confirmed
    that large trucks would have difficulty accessing this driveway in
    the reverse movement if the road width in the vicinity of the
    driveway is reduced, even with a minor reduction.




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                Summary Evaluation

·   Although Alternative 1 ("Do Nothing") has the lowest cost, it does
    not provide an opportunity to improve the public realm of the
    boulevard spaces and accommodate to the future function of
    these roadways.
·   Alternative 2 also does not provide an opportunity to improve the
    public realm of the boulevard spaces and accommodate to the
    future function of these roadways.
·   Alternative 5 is not considered comfortable for cyclists and angle
    parking may not be comfortable for motorists.
·   Although Alternative 3 provides an opportunity to enhance the
    boulevard spaces, it could encourage cut through traffic which
    could in turn, increase cut through traffic on other local
    roadways. As previously indicated, Sudbury Street will be
    extended to intersect with Queen Street West at Gladstone
    Avenue, thereby creating a four-legged intersection.
·   Alternative 4 provides the maximum boulevard space to enhance
    pedestrian infrastructure and eliminates the potential for
    eastbound and southbound cut through traffic.
·   Alternative 4 also provides the most narrow road width and
    conforms to a typical local roadway.
·   Alternative 4 has the most positive impact on the natural
    environment.
·   Alternative 4 provides the maximum benefits for improving the
    public realm, providing the maximum green space and an
    opportunity to convert these roadways from minor arterial
    roadways to local roadways.




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
             Refined Preferred Solution
·   As a result of the concerns received at the Public Open House No. 1 and
    the issues identified, the City has refined the Preferred Solution
    (Alternative 4), as shown in the plan below:




·   The existing road width on Peel Avenue in the vicinity of the driveway of No. 11
    Peel Avenue would be maintained to accommodate truck access in the reverse
    movement.

·   Should the function of No. 11 Peel Avenue change in the future, the following
    features will be evaluated:
    - Narrowing the road width in the vicinity of No. 11 Peel Avenue to
     the same road width as proposed on all other sections of Peel
     Avenue;
    - Providing on-street parking in the vicinity of the driveway of No. 11 Peel
     Avenue;
    - Implementing trees on the south side of Peel Avenue, in the vicinity
      of the driveway of No. 11 Peel Avenue; and
    - Implementing a contra-flow bicycle lane.


    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                       Next Steps


1. Receive comments from the public ­ November
   30, 2009.


2. Confirm Preferred Solution based on comments
   received.

3. Obtain City of Toronto Council Approval ­
   February 2010.


4. Issue Notice of Study Completion and
   commence a minimum 30-day period for public
   review.




   Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                                         Thank You

Your comments and concerns are important to us!

 Please complete a comment sheet and place it in the box
    provided or mail it back to us. Your comments will be
considered in the assessment of the Preferred Solution for the
   reconstruction of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue.

                                Questions? Please Contact:

                                         Maogosha Pyjor
                                 Public Consultation Coordinator
                                        Tel: 416-338-2850
                                       Fax: 416-392-2974
                                   Email: mpyjor@toronto.ca


  Please submit all comments by November 30, 2009.

                    Keep updated!
You can find any new information about the project by
             accessing the city's website:
            http://www.toronto.ca/involved/
Comments and information regarding this study are being collected to assist the City of Toronto in meeting the requirements
of the Environmental Assessment Act. This material will be maintained on file for use during the study and may be included in
     study documentation. With the exception of personal information all documents will become part of the public record.




  Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
                                                                       Municipal Class Environmental Assessment
                                                                                   Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction

                                               COMMENT SHEET
                                   Public Open House #2 ­ November 16, 2009
Background
The purpose of the Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Study is to review the feasibility of changing the design of Peel Avenue and
Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen Street West, and evaluate alternative methods to address this.

The City of Toronto is interested in your comments regarding this project. Please take a few minutes to complete this comment
sheet. All comments will be considered.


Question 1.
Five proposed alternatives were developed. The City has recommended Alternative 4:
        Narrow roadway by approximately 4.5 metres;
        Convert Gladstone Avenue and Peel Avenue to operate one-way;
        Provide parallel parking on both sides of roadway;
        Boulevard width of approximately 5.7 meters; and
        Double row of trees provided where possible (subject to utility locations and detailed design).
Do you agree with the recommended solution? Please indicate why or why not.




                                                                                                                    1
Question 2.
Do you have concerns about the potential impacts the recommended solution(s) may have on you? Please explain.




Question 3.
Do you have any other comments on this study?




Thank you for participating in this study.
For more information about this project, please visit our website at www.toronto.ca/involved. Please return this completed Comment Sheet to
our staff at the Registration Table or place in the `In Box'. You can also fax it or use the provided postage paid envelope to mail the form in by
November 30, 2009 to:

Maogosha Pyjor                                    Telephone: 416-338-2850
Public Consultation Co-ordinator                  Fax: 416-392-2974
City of Toronto                                   Email: mpyjor@toronto.ca
Metro Hall, 19th Floor
55 John Street
Toronto, Ontario M5V 3C6

Comments and information regarding this project are being collected under the City of Toronto Act, 2006 and by-law 603-2007 for the purpose of
meeting environmental assessment requirements. With the exception of personal information, all comments will become a part of the public record.
Questions about the collection of your information should be addressed to Ms. Maogosha Pyjor, Public Consultation Coordinator, City of Toronto,
                  th
55 John Street, 19 Floor, Metro Hall, Toronto, Ontario, M5V 3C6, Telephone: 416-338-2850, Fax: 416-392-2974, email: mpyjor@toronto.ca




                                                                                                                                        2
Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction
Municipal Class Environmental Assessment
Summary of Public Comments ­ November 16, 2009


      #1 Do you agree with the recommended                     #2 Do you have              #3 Do you have any other
      solutions? Please indicate why or why not.               concerns about the          comments on this study?
                                                               potential impacts the
                                                               recommended
                                                               solution(s) may have
                                                               on you?
1         1. Sound suppression on walls of the tunnel          The amount of traffic       It does not take into
          2. Speed bumps to slow traffic on Dufferin           and its speed will be       considerating the views of
          3. Re-build railway in front of Gladstone, get Go    getting worse.              the locals.
             Train to stop their
          4. Electrify Go Train (the whole of ? rail system
             is electric hybrid can't be just electric ­ 20
             miles)
2     Sounds fine. Really like the idea of double row of       Dufferin becoming the
      trees.                                                   next autobahn!

      One question would be trees in a trench. Will salt       Please insist upon lights
      distribution affect trees? Is the road low enough to     to replace crosswalk
      prevent splash up? What kind of trench will the trees    light at Dufferin &
      sit in? What will be done re. soil erosion?              Melbourne.
3     Absolutely ridiculous decision to proceed with #4. I     See Answer in question      Allow option #3! Pursue it
      regreat attending the May open house and missing         1. I'll repeat: Gladstone   further. Double rows of trees
      the deadline for submitting my feedback.                 is a one-way street         are not necessary if it will
                                                               south of Dundas.            allow for two-way traffic.
      Option 4 is a poor choice for several reasons, not       Remove the option to        Boulevard space ca be
      least of which is diverting all south-bound (one way!)   reach Queen and not I'm     sacrificed. 5.7 metres!! The
    Gladstone traffic over to Dufferin St. to reach Queen   stuck having to turn left      street aesthetics will remain
    St.! Now, when I travel south on Gladstone towards      onto Dufferin, with no         visually consistent without a
    Queen, I have to move onto Dufferin (with no lighted    lighted intersections to       wide boulevard and double
    intersections to then continue east bound and           control traffic. It's also a   row of trees. There's still
    especially to reach Price Chopper at the end of my      poor choice for cyclists       ample green space with a
    street. This includes my bike rides and car rides!      and Price Chopper              narrower boulevard.
                                                            customers.
4   Yes.                                                    Would prefer, as a
    Prefer the narrow lanes and wide boulevards. One        cyclist, to have any
    way generates less conflict with cyclists.              future bike lanes
                                                            installed now, rather
                                                            than later. This will be a
                                                            high bicycle traffic area.
                                                            At a minimum, should be
                                                            a posted bike route from
                                                            Sudbury/King
                                                            intersection to Dufferin
                                                            St.
5   Yes.                                                    Potentially. I'm getting       Looks great!
                                                            married at the Gladstone
     Improved opportunities for public realm                next September (2010)
    enhancement. Eliminate through traffic increase from    and potential
    Sudbury. Interim allowance for 11 Peel can help         construction on
    case transition to potential lighter                    Gladstone could be
    industrial/employment uses in future.                   noisy!
6   Fine.                                                   See #1.                        No.

    Sounds attractive but my concerns are related to
    south of Queen. How much more traffic? Is a light
    possible at crosswalk on Dufferin/Melbourne?

    What happens to increased traffic at Exhibition?
7   Put something in the tunnel to reduce the sound. The All the roads east/west           I suggest that we install a toll


                                                                                                                              2
     noise on Dufferin south of Queen is bad. Walking           in Parkdale are now        booth in the tunnel. All
     thru the tunnel is going to be awful.                      used to get people         monies collected will be
                                                                out/into downtown          given to the residents on
                                                                Toronto. Now, with the     Melbourne Ave.
                                                                tunnel we will have a
                                                                north/south route. The
                                                                residents of Parkdale
                                                                should get some relief
                                                                from the out? ­I suggest
                                                                local people in Parkdale
                                                                not have to pay city
                                                                taxes!!!
8    Would prefer Peel to be 1-way W. bound and                 Not me personally.
     Gladstone 2-way so that Gladstone residents do not
     have to loop around block to get to Queen E. or W.
     bound.

     Double row of trees seem excessive. Canopies will
     crowd together and creates more of a special axis
     than lower Gladstone deserves.
9    Yes.                                                       I usually go to Gladstone Thanks!
     I think option is great. I think the contra flow lane on   Hotel by cycling south of
     Peel & Gladstone would be even better (but I               Gladstone. The one-way
     understand city's love of parking).                        street north of Price
                                                                Choppers (to Peel) will
                                                                be a challenge to me.
10                                                                                        I agree with option #4
                                                                                          however, In my view there
                                                                                          are too many trees on the
                                                                                          North side.
11   Yes.                                                       No.

     Given the demand for things like trees and street


                                                                                                                       3
     furniture from the May meeting, narrowing the road
     any less than the 4.5 m would be fairly pointless. If
     traffic management studies find that making these
     streets one way will not lead to excessive congestion
     in areas, then providing a more pedestrian oriented
     street should make it a safer street and also a place
     where pedestrians feel like they belong.

     Parallel parking on each side should provide what
     will feel like a barrier between the pavement and the
     road, once again making the pedestrian feel safer
     and less like they are on a main road.
12   I agree with alternative 4 with one exception "no pay   Only concern is paying      No pay and display parking.
     and disp0lay parking".                                  extra to park in front of
                                                             my house were I already
     If you are going to have pay and display parking then   pay for an on street
     those with on street parking permits (3K) must be       parking permit and pay
     exempt.                                                 taxes.
13   Yes.                                                                                Why was reversing Northcote
                                                                                         to run one-way north of
     Include Gladstone two-way N. of Queen to Price                                      Queen to accommodate new
     Choppper Entrance/Exit.                                                             Price Chopper En trace on
     Consider Northcote North to Price Chopper New                                       east side of Price Chopper
     East Entracne (West side of Northcote, north of                                     land not considered in plans?
     Queen)
                                                                                         This would alleviate Queen
                                                                                         St. traffic flow and left turn
                                                                                         choice at Gladstone to enter
                                                                                         Price Chopper for cars off
                                                                                         Dufferin, since Peel no
                                                                                         longer available.
14   Yes. I support Alternative 4.                           The only small downside     I fully support Alternative 4.
                                                             is that Price Chopper


                                                                                                                          4
customers will loose       I also hope they re-pave
TTC stops: the one right   Dufferin St. from Queen
beside the store (on the   north to Dundas. I think that
east side of Gladstone)    stretch has consistently
and the one on the         made it to the list of worst
north-west corner of       sections of road in Toronto
Queen and Gladstone.       year after year!
That means that anyone
who wants to take a bus
north or south on
Dufferin, will have to
walk ­ with all their
groceries ­ one block
west before they can get
on a bus. For people
heading southbound,
that means crossing a
minimum of 2 streets
(Queen then Dufferin).
For northbound
shoppers, they would
have to walk up
Gladstone to Peel then
over to Dufferin. The
TTC should consider
putting a stop close to
the Peel/Dufferin
intersection.




                                                           5
Appendix E
Agency Consultation
Richard Butts, Deputy City Manager            Policy, Planning, Finance & Administration Christine Paglialunga
                                              Metro Hall, 19th Floor                     Public Consultation Unit
                                              55 John Street
                                              Toronto, ON M5V 3C6

                                              Tel: 416-338-2400
                                              Fax: 416-392-2974
                                              Email: cpaglia@toronto.ca




May 14, 2009

Margaret Sault
Director of Research, Lands and Membership
Mississaugas of the New Credit First Nation
2789 Mississauga Road, R.R. 6
Hagersville, ON N0A 1H0
905-768-0100
masault@yahoo.com

Dear Margaret Sault:

The City of Toronto is initiating a Municipal Class Environmental Assessment (Class EA) to review
the feasibility of changing the design of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel
Avenue and Queen Street West.

The study is being carried out in accordance with the Class EA requirements for Schedule B
projects. The attached Notice of Study Commencement & Public Open House provides some
background information and describes the study purpose, process, and the study area.

No response to this letter is required, unless the claims circumstance has changed in
Toronto.

Sincerely,




Christine Paglialunga
Public Consultation Co-ordinator
City of Toronto

CC: Marilia Cimini P. Eng, Project Manager
Richard Butts, Deputy City Manager           Policy, Planning, Finance & Administration Christine Paglialunga
                                             Metro Hall, 19th Floor                     Public Consultation Unit
                                             55 John Street
                                             Toronto, ON M5V 3C6

                                             Tel: 416-338-2400
                                             Fax: 416-392-2974
                                             Email: cpaglia@toronto ca



May 14, 2009

Don Boswell,
Research Ontario Team
10 Wellington Street
Gatineau, Quebec
K1A 0H4
Telephone:(819) 953-1940
Fax:(819) 997-9873
Boswelld@ainc-inac.gc.ca

Dear Don Boswell:

The City of Toronto is initiating a Municipal Class Environmental Assessment (Class EA) to review
the feasibility of changing the design of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel
Avenue and Queen Street West.

The study is being carried out in accordance with the Class EA requirements for Schedule B
projects. The attached Notice of Study Commencement & Public Open House provides some
background information and describes the study purpose, process, and the study area.

No response to this letter is required, unless the claims circumstance has changed in
Toronto.

Sincerely,




Christine Paglialunga
Public Consultation Co-ordinator
City of Toronto

CC: Marilia Cimini P. Eng, Project Manager
Richard Butts, Deputy City Manager           Policy, Planning, Finance & Administration   Christine Paglialunga
                                              Metro Hall, 19th Floor                      Public Consultation Unit
                                              55 John Street
                                              Toronto, ON M5V 3C6

                                              Tel: 416-338-2400
                                              Fax: 416-392-2974
                                              Email: cpaglia@toronto ca



May 14, 2009

Marc-André Millaire
Litigation Team Leader
Litigation -Management and Resolutions Branch
Indian and Northern Affairs Canada
Room 1430 25 ED
10 Wellington Street
Gatineau QC K1A 0H4
Tél.: (819) 956-3181
Fax: (819) 953-6143

Dear Marc-André Millaire:

The City of Toronto is initiating a Municipal Class Environmental Assessment (Class EA) to review
the feasibility of changing the design of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel
Avenue and Queen Street West.

The study is being carried out in accordance with the Class EA requirements for Schedule B
projects. The attached Notice of Study Commencement & Public Open House provides some
background information and describes the study purpose, process, and the study area.

No response to this letter is required, unless the claims circumstance has changed in
Toronto.

Sincerely,




Christine Paglialunga
Public Consultation Co-ordinator
City of Toronto

CC: Marilia Cimini P. Eng, Project Manager
Richard Butts, Deputy City Manager            Policy, Planning, Finance & Administration Christine Paglialunga
                                              Metro Hall, 19th Floor                     Public Consultation Unit
                                              55 John Street
                                              Toronto, ON M5V 3C6

                                              Tel: 416-338-2400
                                              Fax: 416-392-2974
                                              Email: cpaglia@toronto ca



May 14, 2009

Mae Maracle
Diversity Management
Community Engagement Consultant
Strategic & Corporate Policy/Healthy City Office
City Hall, 10th Floor, East Tower
100 Queen Street West
Toronto, ON M5H 2N2

Dear Mae Maracle:

The City of Toronto is initiating a Municipal Class Environmental Assessment (Class EA) to review
the feasibility of changing the design of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel
Avenue and Queen Street West.

The study is being carried out in accordance with the Class EA requirements for Schedule B
projects. The attached Notice of Study Commencement & Public Open House provides some
background information and describes the study purpose, process, and the study area.

No response to this letter is required, unless the claims circumstance has changed in
Toronto.

Sincerely,




Christine Paglialunga
Public Consultation Co-ordinator
City of Toronto

CC: Marilia Cimini P. Eng, Project Manager
Richard Butts, Deputy City Manager               Policy, Planning, Finance & Administration Christine Paglialunga
                                                 Metro Hall, 19th Floor                     Public Consultation Unit
                                                 55 John Street
                                                 Toronto, ON M5V 3C6

                                                 Tel: 416-338-2400
                                                 Fax: 416-392-2974
                                                 Email: cpaglial@toronto.ca




April 12, 2010

Francois Lachance
Policy and Relationships Branch
Ministry of Aboriginal Affairs
720, Bay Street, 4th Floor
Toronto, ON M5G 2K1

Dear Francois Lachance:

The City of Toronto is initiating a Municipal Class Environmental Assessment (Class EA) to review the
feasibility of changing the design of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel Avenue and Queen
Street West.

The study is being carried out in accordance with the Class EA requirements for Schedule B projects. The
attached Notice of Study Commencement & Public Open House provides some background information and
describes the study purpose, process, and the study area.

No response to this letter is required, unless the claims circumstance has changed in Toronto.

Sincerely,




Christine Paglialunga
Public Consultation Co-ordinator
City of Toronto

CC: Marilia Cimini P. Eng, Project Manager
Appendix F
Land Use Designation
Study Focus Area
  Appendix G
Parking Demand Survey
                        Parking Demand Survey
·   A parking demand survey was undertaken on Peel Avenue and Gladstone
    Avenue on Wednesday March 11 and Thursday March 12, 2009 during the
    busiest 8-hour period between 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
·   The parking demand survey identified the location and number of vehicles
    that parked along Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue, between Peel
    Avenue and Queen Street West. The data was recorded in half-hour
    intervals.
·   The following summarizes the results of the survey:
    Peel Avenue (North Side):
                                                        Average No. of Legal   Average No. of
                                 No. of Legal Parking
    Time                                                  Parking Spaces       Illegal Parking
                                  Spaces Available
                                                              Utilized         Spaces Utilized
    7:30   a.m. ­   9:00 a.m.             9                       7                    0
    9:00   a.m. ­   12:00 p.m.            9                       5                    0
    1:00   p.m. ­   3:00 p.m.             9                       6                    0
    4:00   p.m. ­   6:00 p.m.             0                     N/A                    0

    Peel Avenue (South Side):
                                                        Average No. of Legal   Average No. of
                                 No. of Legal Parking
    Time                                                  Parking Spaces       Illegal Parking
                                  Spaces Available
                                                              Utilized         Spaces Utilized
    7:30   a.m. ­   9:00 a.m.             0                     N/A                    0
    9:00   a.m. ­   12:00 p.m.            8                       1                    0
    1:00   p.m. ­   3:00 p.m.             8                       2                    0
    4:00   p.m. ­   6:00 p.m.             8                       6                    1

    Gladstone Avenue (West Side):
                                                        Average No. of Legal   Average No. of
                                 No. of Legal Parking
    Time                                                  Parking Spaces       Illegal Parking
                                  Spaces Available
                                                              Utilized         Spaces Utilized
    7:30   a.m. ­   9:00 a.m.             0                     N/A                    0
    9:00   a.m. ­   12:00 p.m.           11                       7                    0
    1:00   p.m. ­   3:00 p.m.            11                      11                    0
    4:00   p.m. ­   6:00 p.m.             0                     N/A                    0

    Gladstone Avenue (East Side):
                                                        Average No. of Legal   Average No. of
                                 No. of Legal Parking
    Time                                                  Parking Spaces       Illegal Parking
                                  Spaces Available
                                                              Utilized         Spaces Utilized
    7:30   a.m. ­   9:00 a.m.             0                     N/A                    0
    9:00   a.m. ­   12:00 p.m.            0                     N/A                    1
    1:00   p.m. ­   3:00 p.m.             0                     N/A                    1
    4:00   p.m. ­   6:00 p.m.             0                     N/A                    1




    Peel-Gladstone Reconstruction Environmental Assessment Study
   Appendix H
Existing Traffic Volumes
                                                      City of Toronto - Traffic Data Centre & Safety Bureau

                                                                     Turning Movement Count Summary Report
                                                                                                                       Survey Date:            2009-Mar-11           (Wednesday)
 DUFFERIN ST AT PEEL AVE
                                                                                                                       Survey Type:            Routine Hours

   Time         Vehicle               NORTHBOUND                        EASTBOUND                       SOUTHBOUND                               WESTBOUND
  Period         Type      Exits     Left Thru Right Total   Exits    Left Thru Right Total      Exits Left Thru Right     Total   Exits       Left Thru Right Total             Peds   Bike     Other
                  CAR         224      0     0    3      3     355       0   0       0       0          3   352    0   0     352           0      3       0    224    227    N      2        0     0
 08:15-09:15
                  TRK          16      0     0    0      0      16       0   0      0        0          0    16    0   0      16           0      0       0     16     16    S      3        0     0
 AM PEAK          BUS          24      0     0    0      0      21       0   0      0        0          0    21    0   0      21           0      0       0     24     24    E      1        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                             W      0        0     0

               TOTAL:         264      0     0    3      3     392       0    0      0       0          3   389    0   0     389           0       3      0    264    267

                  CAR         384      0     0    0      0     290       0   0       0       0          2   290    0   0     290           0      2       0    384    386    N      6        0     0
 17:00-18:00
                  TRK           5      0     0    0      0       8       0   0       0       0          0     8    0   0       8           0      0       0      5      5    S      5        0     0
 PM PEAK          BUS          19      0     0    0      0      21       0   0       0       0          0    21    0   0      21           0      0       0     19     19    E      1        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                             W      0        0     0

               TOTAL:         408      0     0    0      0     319       0    0      0       0          2   319    0   0     319           0       2      0    408    410

                  CAR         234      0     1    2      3     265       0   0       0       0          2   263    0   0     263           0      2       0    233    235    N      4        0     0
 OFF HR
 AVG              TRK          19      0     0    1      1      19       0   0       0       0          0    18    0   0      18           0      0       0     19     19    S      9        0     0
                  BUS          15      0     0    0      0      16       0   0       0       0          0    16    0   0      16           0      0       0     15     15    E      1        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                             W      0        0     0

               TOTAL:         268      0     1    3      4     300       0    0      0       0          2   297    0   0     297           0       2      0    267    269

                  CAR         372      0     1    6      7     619       0   0       0       0          5   613    0   0     613           0      5       0    371    376    N      3        0     0
 07:30-09:30
                  TRK          31      0     0    0      0      32       0   0      0        0          0    32    0   0      32           0      0       0     31     31    S      5        0     0
 2 HR AM          BUS          47      0     0    0      0      46       0   0      0        0          0    46    0   0      46           0      0       0     47     47    E      3        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                             W      0        0     0

               TOTAL:         450      0     1    6      7     697       0    0      0       0          5   691    0   0     691           0       5      0    449    454

                  CAR         703      0     1    1      2     563       0   0       0       0          3   562    0   0     562           0      3       0    702    705    N     11        0     0
 16:00-18:00
                  TRK          18      0     0    0      0      13       0   0      0        0          0    13    0   0      13           0      0       0     18     18    S     12        0     0
 2 HR PM          BUS          40      0     0    0      0      42       0   0      0        0          0    42    0   0      42           0      0       0     40     40    E      4        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                             W      0        0     0

               TOTAL:         761      0     1    1      2     618       0    0      0       0          3   617    0   0     617           0       3      0    760    763

                  CAR       2,010      0     7   13     20    2,239      0   0       0       0         16 2,226    0   0   2,226           0     16       0 2,003    2,019   N     30        0     0
 07:30-18:00
                  TRK         124      0     0    3      3     120       0   0      0        0          0   117    0   0     117           0      0       0    124    124    S     54        0     0
 8 HR SUM         BUS         147      0     0    0      0     150       0   0      0        0          0   150    0   0     150           0      0       0    147    147    E     10        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                             W      0        0     0

               TOTAL:       2,281      0     7   16     23    2,509      0    0      0       0         16 2,493    0   0   2,493           0      16      0 2,274    2,290

Total 8 Hour Vehicle Volume: 4,806                                                Total 8 Hour Bicycle Volume: 0                                   Total 8 Hour Intersection Volume: 4,806
Comment:



                                                                                         Page 1 of 1                                                            Printed On: 23 Mar, 2009 10:47:45AM
                                                           City of Toronto - Traffic Data Centre & Safety Bureau


                                                                            Intersection Warrant Summary Report XX


  DUFFERIN ST AT PEEL AVE                                                                                                Survey Date:       11-Mar-2009 (Wednesday)

                                                                                                                         Survey Type:       Routine Hours


                                                                                                                                                                  Peds     All       MAJOR     MINOR
                                                                                                                                                               Crossing Crossing       ST       ST
           Time         NORTH BOUND             EAST BOUND             SOUTH BOUND            WEST BOUND                  BICYCLES                 OTHER                                                  TOTAL
                                                                                                                                                               Major St. Major St.   APRS      APRS
          Period       Left Thru Right        Left Thru Right         Left Thru Right       Left Thru Right         NB    SB EB WB          NB    SB EB     WB                                              1A
                                                                                                                                                                 5A         2B        2A        1B


        7:30-8:30        0      1      3       0       0        0     311       0     0        3        0    197     0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0       3          6       200      315        515

        8:30-9:30        0      0      3       0       0        0     380       0     0        2        0    252     0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0       0          2       254      383        637

  10:00-11:00            0      2      2       0       0        0     287       0     0        4        0    234     0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0       0          4       238      291        529

  11:00-12:00            0      1      0       0       0        0     281       0     0        1        0    256     0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0       2          3       257      282        539

  13:00-14:00            0      1      4       0       0        0     320       0     0        3        0    280     0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0       0          3       283      325        608

  14:00-15:00            0      1      3       0       0        0     297       0     0        0        0    295     0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0       1          1       295      301        596

  16:00-17:00            0      1      1       0       0        0     298       0     0        1        0    352     0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0       3        302       353      300        653

  17:00-18:00            0      0      0       0       0        0     319       0     0        2        0    408     0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0       1        320       410      319        729

  8 Hour Total:          0      7     16       0       0        0   2,493       0     0       16        0   2,274    0      0    0      0    0     0    0    0     10        641      2,290   2,516       4,806

Comment:




Note: Volume Of All Crossing Major Street (2B) is defined As:

(i)     Left Turns From Both Minor Street Approaches
(ii)    The Heaviest Through Volume From The Minor Street
(iii)   50% Of The Heavier Left Turn Movement From Major Street When Both the Following Criteria Are Matched
        (a) The Left Turn Volume > 120 vph
        (b) The Left Turn Volume Plus The Opposing Volume > 720 vph
(iv)    Pedestrians Crossing The Major Street
(v)     Bicycle Volumes Are Included In "THRU" Movement Totals


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 1                                                      Printed On: 23 Mar, 2009 10:48:14AM
                                                      City of Toronto - Traffic Data Centre & Safety Bureau

                                                                      Turning Movement Count Summary Report
                                                                                                                           Survey Date:            2009-Mar-11           (Wednesday)
 GLADSTONE AVE AT PEEL AVE
                                                                                                                           Survey Type:            Routine Hours

   Time         Vehicle               NORTHBOUND                         EASTBOUND                        SOUTHBOUND                                 WESTBOUND
  Period         Type      Exits     Left Thru Right Total    Exits    Left Thru Right Total       Exits Left Thru Right       Total   Exits       Left Thru Right Total             Peds   Bike     Other
                  CAR           0     209    0    0     209       0       0   0     313     313          409   0     96    3      99       212        0       0      0      0    N     10        0     0
 08:30-09:30
                  TRK           0       13   0    0      13       0       0   0      19       19          22   0      3    1       4        14        0       0      0      0    S      2        0     0
 AM PEAK          BUS           0       20   0    0      20       0       0   0      21       21          22   0      1    0       1        20        0       0      0      0    E     61        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                 W     14        0     0

               TOTAL:           0     242    0    0    242        0       0    0    353     353          453   0    100    4     104       246         0      0      0       0

                  CAR           0     380    0    0     380       0       0   0     270     270          344   0     74    5      79       385        0       0      0      0    N     19        0     0
 16:45-17:45
                  TRK           0        7   0    0       7       0       0   0       4        4           4   0      0    0       0           7      0       0      0      0    S      4        0     0
 PM PEAK          BUS           0       20   0    0      20       0       0   0      19       19          19   0      0    0       0        20        0       0      0      0    E     63        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                 W     21        0     0

               TOTAL:           0     407    0    0    407        0       0    0    293     293          367   0     74    5      79       412         0      0      0       0

                  CAR           0     238    0    0     238       0       0   0     233     233          285   0     52    4      56       242        0       0      0      0    N     10        0     0
 OFF HR
 AVG              TRK           0       17   0    0      17       0       0   0      19       19          23   0      4    0       4        17        0       0      0      0    S      3        0     0
                  BUS           0       16   0    0      16       0       0   0      15       15          16   0      1    0       1        16        0       0      0      0    E     39        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                 W     10        0     0

               TOTAL:           0     271    0    0    271        0       0    0    267     267          324   0     57    4      61       275         0      0      0       0

                  CAR           0     368    0    0     368       0       0   0     557     557          706   0    149    7     156       375        0       0      0      0    N     20        0     0
 07:30-09:30
                  TRK           0       29   0    0      29       0       0   0      41       41          44   0      3    1       4        30        0       0      0      0    S      3        0     0
 2 HR AM          BUS           0       45   0    0      45       0       0   0      46       46          47   0      1    0       1        45        0       0      0      0    E    101        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                 W     31        0     0

               TOTAL:           0     442    0    0    442        0       0    0    644     644          797   0    153    8     161       450         0      0      0       0

                  CAR           0     709    0    0     709       0       0   0     518     518          658   0    140    7     147       716        0       0      0      0    N     37        0     0
 16:00-18:00
                  TRK           0       12   0    0      12       0       0   0       8        8           9   0      1    0       1        12        0       0      0      0    S      6        0     0
 2 HR PM          BUS           0       42   0    0      42       0       0   0      40       40          42   0      2    0       2        42        0       0      0      0    E    127        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                 W     35        0     0

               TOTAL:           0     763    0    0    763        0       0    0    566     566          709   0    143    7     150       770         0      0      0       0

                  CAR           0    2,030   0    0   2,030       0       0   0    2,007   2,007     2,504     0    497   30     527      2,060       0       0      0      0    N     95        0     0
 07:30-18:00
                  TRK           0     108    0    0     108       0       0   0     125     125          144   0     19    2      21       110        0       0      0      0    S     22        0     0
 8 HR SUM         BUS           0     149    0    0     149       0       0   0     147     147          153   0      6    0      6        149        0       0      0      0    E    383        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                 W    106        0     0

               TOTAL:           0    2,287   0    0   2,287       0       0    0   2,279   2,279     2,801     0    522   32     554      2,319        0      0      0       0

Total 8 Hour Vehicle Volume: 5,120                                                 Total 8 Hour Bicycle Volume: 0                                      Total 8 Hour Intersection Volume: 5,120
Comment:



                                                                                           Page 1 of 1                                                              Printed On: 24 Mar, 2009 1:09:34PM
                                                           City of Toronto - Traffic Data Centre & Safety Bureau


                                                                           Intersection Warrant Summary Report XX


  GLADSTONE AVE AT PEEL AVE                                                                                               Survey Date:       11-Mar-2009 (Wednesday)

                                                                                                                          Survey Type:       Routine Hours


                                                                                                                                                                   Peds     All       MAJOR    MINOR
                                                                                                                                                                Crossing Crossing       ST      ST
           Time         NORTH BOUND             EAST BOUND            SOUTH BOUND             WEST BOUND                   BICYCLES                 OTHER                                                 TOTAL
                                                                                                                                                                Major St. Major St.   APRS     APRS
          Period       Left Thru Right        Left Thru Right        Left Thru Right        Left Thru Right          NB    SB EB WB          NB    SB EB     WB                                             1A
                                                                                                                                                                  5A         2B        2A       1B


        7:30-8:30      200      0      0       0       0     291       0      53      4        0        0        0    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0      57        310       291     257        548

        8:30-9:30      242      0      0       0       0     353       0     100      4        0        0        0    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0      75        417       353     346        699

  10:00-11:00          227      0      0       0       0     250       0      40      3        0        0        0    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0      45         45       250     270        520

  11:00-12:00          265      0      0       0       0     259       0      54      8        0        0        0    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0      65         65       259     327        586

  13:00-14:00          281      0      0       0       0     291       0      61      2        0        0        0    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0      42         42       291     344        635

  14:00-15:00          309      0      0       0       0     269       0      71      4        0        0        0    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0      43         43       269     384        653

  16:00-17:00          352      0      0       0       0     271       0      77      3        0        0        0    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0      78         78       271     432        703

  17:00-18:00          411      0      0       0       0     295       0      66      4        0        0        0    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0      84         84       295     481        776

  8 Hour Total:      2,287      0      0       0       0   2,279       0     522     32        0        0        0    0      0    0      0    0     0    0    0    489      1,084     2,279    2,841      5,120

Comment:




Note: Volume Of All Crossing Major Street (2B) is defined As:

(i)     Left Turns From Both Minor Street Approaches
(ii)    The Heaviest Through Volume From The Minor Street
(iii)   50% Of The Heavier Left Turn Movement From Major Street When Both the Following Criteria Are Matched
        (a) The Left Turn Volume > 120 vph
        (b) The Left Turn Volume Plus The Opposing Volume > 720 vph
(iv)    Pedestrians Crossing The Major Street
(v)     Bicycle Volumes Are Included In "THRU" Movement Totals


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 1                                                       Printed On: 24 Mar, 2009 1:10:17PM
                                                         City of Toronto - Traffic Data Centre & Safety Bureau

                                                                         Turning Movement Count Summary Report
                                                                                                                             Survey Date:            2009-Mar-12           (Thursday)
 GLADSTONE AVE AT LN 40 M N OF QUEEN ST
                                                                                                                             Survey Type:            Routine Hours

   Time         Vehicle               NORTHBOUND                            EASTBOUND                       SOUTHBOUND                                 WESTBOUND
  Period         Type      Exits     Left Thru Right Total       Exits    Left Thru Right Total      Exits Left Thru Right       Total   Exits       Left Thru Right Total             Peds   Bike     Other
                  CAR         232      0    212     21     233      38       0   0       0       0         359   17    343   0     360           0     16       0     20     36    N      3        0     0
 08:15-09:15
                  TRK          18      0     17      1      18       4       0   0      0        0          17    3     13   0      16           0      4       0      1      5    S      1        0     0
 AM PEAK          BUS          27      0     27      0      27       0       0   0      0        0          27    0     27   0      27           0      0       0      0      0    E    100        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W     28        0     0

               TOTAL:         277      0    256    22     278       42       0    0      0       0         403    20   383   0     403           0      20      0    21       41

                  CAR         372      0    344     52     396      78       0   0       0       0         312   26    274   0     300           0     38       0     28     66    N     11        0     0
 17:00-18:00
                  TRK           6      0      6      0       6       0       0   0       0       0           8    0      8   0       8           0      0       0      0      0    S     20        0     0
 PM PEAK          BUS          18      0     18      0      18       0       0   0       0       0          20    0     20   0      20           0      0       0      0      0    E    232        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W     26        0     0

               TOTAL:         396      0    368     52    420       78       0    0      0       0         340    26   302   0     328           0      38      0     28      66

                  CAR         229      0    217     27     244      38       0   0       0       0         287   11    262   0     273           0     25       0     12     37    N      9        0     0
 OFF HR
 AVG              TRK          21      0     20      2      22       3       0   0      0        0          21    1     19   0      20           0      2       0      1      3    S      8        0     0
                  BUS          15      0     15      0      15       0       0   0      0        0          15    0     15   0      15           0      0       0      0      0    E    138        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W     28        0     0

               TOTAL:         265      0    252     29    281       41       0    0      0       0         323    12   296   0     308           0      27      0    13       40

                  CAR         385      0    362     38     400      59       0   0       0       0         637   21    615   0     636           0     22       0     23     45    N      4        0     0
 07:30-09:30
                  TRK          30      0     28      5      33      11       0   0      0        0          33    6     25   0      31           0      8       0      2     10    S      5        0     0
 2 HR AM          BUS          52      0     52      0      52       0       0   0      0        0          45    0     45   0      45           0      0       0      0      0    E    162        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W     43        0     0

               TOTAL:         467      0    442    43     485       70       0    0      0       0         715    27   685   0     712           0      30      0    25       55

                  CAR         685      0    640     92     732     135       0   0       0       0         626   43    546   0     589           0     80       0     45    125    N     34        0     0
 16:00-18:00
                  TRK          20      0     19      0      19       0       0   0      0        0          15    0     15   0      15           0      0       0      1      1    S     33        0     0
 2 HR PM          BUS          40      0     40      0      40       0       0   0      0        0          38    0     38   0      38           0      0       0      0      0    E    452        0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W     65        0     0

               TOTAL:         745      0    699    92     791      135       0    0      0       0         679    43   599   0     642           0      80      0    46     126

                  CAR       1,985      0 1,869     236   2,105     344       0   0       0       0     2,408     108 2,208   0   2,316           0    200       0    116    316    N     75        0     0
 07:30-18:00
                  TRK         133      0    126     13     139      22       0   0      0        0         130    9    114   0     123           0     16       0      7     23    S     70        0     0
 8 HR SUM         BUS         150      0    150      0     150       0       0   0      0        0         142    0    142   0     142           0      0       0      0      0    E 1,166         0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W   220         0     0

               TOTAL:       2,268      0   2,145   249   2,394     366       0    0      0       0     2,680     117 2,464   0   2,581           0     216      0    123    339

Total 8 Hour Vehicle Volume: 5,314                                                    Total 8 Hour Bicycle Volume: 0                                     Total 8 Hour Intersection Volume: 5,314
Comment: IN AND OUT STUDY



                                                                                             Page 1 of 1                                                              Printed On: 23 Mar, 2009 10:43:37AM
                                                           City of Toronto - Traffic Data Centre & Safety Bureau


                                                                           Intersection Warrant Summary Report XX


  GLADSTONE AVE AT LN 40 M N OF QUEEN ST                                                                                  Survey Date:       12-Mar-2009 (Thursday)

                                                                                                                          Survey Type:       Routine Hours


                                                                                                                                                                   Peds     All        MAJOR     MINOR
                                                                                                                                                                Crossing Crossing        ST       ST
           Time         NORTH BOUND             EAST BOUND            SOUTH BOUND             WEST BOUND                   BICYCLES                 OTHER                                                   TOTAL
                                                                                                                                                                Major St. Major St.    APRS      APRS
          Period       Left Thru Right        Left Thru Right        Left Thru Right        Left Thru Right          NB    SB EB WB          NB    SB EB     WB                                               1A
                                                                                                                                                                  5A         2B         2A        1B


        7:30-8:30        0    195     15       0       0        0     12     318      0        8        0        9    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0        5         13       540       17        557

        8:30-9:30        0    247     28       0       0        0     15     367      0      22         0    16       0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0        4         26       657       38        695

  10:00-11:00            0    225     25       0       0        0     14     277      0      19         0    15       0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0        11        30       541       34        575

  11:00-12:00            0    244     18       0       0        0     11     271      0      21         0    11       0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0        17        38       544       32        576

  13:00-14:00            0    266     34       0       0        0     11     323      0      30         0    10       0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0        22        52       634       40        674

  14:00-15:00            0    269     37       0       0        0     11     309      0      36         0    16       0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0        19        55       626       52        678

  16:00-17:00            0    331     40       0       0        0     17     297      0      42         0    18       0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0        36        78       685       60        745

  17:00-18:00            0    368     52       0       0        0     26     302      0      38         0    28       0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0        31        69       748       66        814

  8 Hour Total:          0   2,145   249       0       0        0    117    2,464     0      216        0   123       0      0    0      0    0     0    0    0    145         361      4,975     339       5,314

Comment: IN AND OUT STUDY




Note: Volume Of All Crossing Major Street (2B) is defined As:

(i)     Left Turns From Both Minor Street Approaches
(ii)    The Heaviest Through Volume From The Minor Street
(iii)   50% Of The Heavier Left Turn Movement From Major Street When Both the Following Criteria Are Matched
        (a) The Left Turn Volume > 120 vph
        (b) The Left Turn Volume Plus The Opposing Volume > 720 vph
(iv)    Pedestrians Crossing The Major Street
(v)     Bicycle Volumes Are Included In "THRU" Movement Totals


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 1                                                        Printed On: 23 Mar, 2009 10:44:26AM
                                                       City of Toronto - Traffic Data Centre & Safety Bureau

                                                                      Turning Movement Count Summary Report
                                                                                                                              Survey Date:           2009-Mar-11           (Wednesday)
 GLADSTONE AVE AT QUEEN ST W
                                                                                                                              Survey Type:           Routine Hours

   Time         Vehicle                NORTHBOUND                        EASTBOUND                         SOUTHBOUND                                  WESTBOUND
  Period         Type      Exits      Left Thru Right Total   Exits    Left Thru Right Total        Exits Left Thru Right          Total   Exits     Left Thru Right Total             Peds   Bike      Other
                  CAR         235       4     3    2      9     806     151   674       4     829          8   130    4     223     357       522       0     295     81    376    N    110         0     0
 08:15-09:15
                  TRK          21       0     0    0      0      24      14    21      1       36          1    3     0      11      14        20       0       9      7     16    S    163         0     0
 AM PEAK          BUS          20       0     0    0      0      18      19    16      0       35          0    2     0      15      17        35       0      20      1     21    E    110         0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W     34         0     0

               TOTAL:         276       4     3    2     9      848     184    711      5     900         9    135     4    249     388       577        0    324    89     413

                  CAR         393       1     2    0      3     624     261   492       0     753          3   132    3     181     316       726       0     544    130    674    N    197         0     0
 17:00-18:00
                  TRK           5       0     0    0      0       7       3     6       0       9          0     1    0       6       7        15       0       9      2     11    S    127         0     0
 PM PEAK          BUS          16       0     0    0      0      11      16    10       0      26          0     1    0      16      17        26       0      10      0     10    E    121         0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W     37         0     0

               TOTAL:         414       1     2    0      3     642     280    508      0     788          3   134     3    203     340       767        0    563    132    695

                  CAR         243       4     3    1      8     471     171   383       4     558          6    87    2     200     289       558       0     354     69    423    N    133         0     0
 OFF HR
 AVG              TRK          21       0     0    0      0      22      14    15       0      29          0     7    0      14      21        35       0      21      7     28    S    103         0     0
                  BUS          17       0     0    0      0      11      16    11       0      27          0     0    0      15      15        28       0      13      1     14    E     82         0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W     19         0     0

               TOTAL:         281       4     3    1      8     504     201    409      4     614          6    94     2    229     325       621        0    388     77    465

                  CAR         418       6     6    2     14    1,453    280 1,211       6   1,497         12   240    6     404     650      1,001      0     591    132    723    N    167         0     0
 07:30-09:30
                  TRK          38       0     0    0      0      51      25    43       1      69          1     8    0      20      28        40       0      20     13     33    S    241         0     0
 2 HR AM          BUS          38       1     0    0      1      36      36    34       0      70          0     2    0      29      31        61       0      31      2     33    E    172         0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W     44         0     0

               TOTAL:         494       7     6    2     15    1,540    341 1,288       7   1,636         13   250     6    453     709      1,102       0    642    147    789

                  CAR         726       4     3    1      8    1,108    486   882       3   1,371          7   225    4     404     633      1,452      0    1,044   237   1,281   N    396         0     0
 16:00-18:00
                  TRK          13       0     0    1      1      19       8    14       0      22          0     4    0      10      14        30       0      20      5     25    S    229         0     0
 2 HR PM          BUS          38       1     0    0      1      23      36    22       0      58          0     1    0      39      40        64       0      24      2     26    E    232         0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W     58         0     0

               TOTAL:         777       5     3    2     10    1,150    530    918      3   1,451          7   230     4    453     687      1,546       0   1,088   244   1,332

                  CAR       2,114      25    21    6     52    4,442   1,448 3,624     26   5,098         42   812    16 1,606     2,434     4,680      0    3,049   645   3,694   N 1,093          0     0
 07:30-18:00
                  TRK         135       1     0    1      2     159      88   117       2     207          2    41    0      85     126       209       0     123     47    170    S    881         0     0
 8 HR SUM         BUS         140       3     0    0      3     104     134   100       0     234          0     4    0     128     132       236       0     105      6    111    E    733         0     0
                                                                                                                                                                                   W    179         0     0

               TOTAL:       2,389      29    21    7     57    4,705   1,670 3,841     28   5,539         44   857    16   1,819   2,692     5,125       0   3,277   698   3,975

Total 8 Hour Vehicle Volume: 12,263                                                  Total 8 Hour Bicycle Volume: 0                                      Total 8 Hour Intersection Volume: 12,263
Comment:



                                                                                            Page 1 of 1                                                               Printed On: 23 Mar, 2009 10:46:01AM
                                                           City of Toronto - Traffic Data Centre & Safety Bureau


                                                                           Intersection Warrant Summary Report XX


  GLADSTONE AVE AT QUEEN ST W                                                                                          Survey Date:       11-Mar-2009 (Wednesday)

                                                                                                                       Survey Type:       Routine Hours


                                                                                                                                                                Peds     All       MAJOR     MINOR
                                                                                                                                                             Crossing Crossing       ST       ST
           Time         NORTH BOUND             EAST BOUND            SOUTH BOUND             WEST BOUND                BICYCLES                 OTHER                                                  TOTAL
                                                                                                                                                             Major St. Major St.   APRS      APRS
          Period       Left Thru Right        Left Thru Right        Left Thru Right        Left Thru Right       NB    SB EB WB          NB    SB EB     WB                                              1A
                                                                                                                                                               5A         2B        2A        1B


        7:30-8:30        3      6      1     147     624        3    114       5    215        0     293     60    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0      97        220     1,127      344        1,471

        8:30-9:30        4      0      1     194     664        4    136       1    238        0     349     87    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0     119        260     1,298      380        1,678

  10:00-11:00            4      7      0     185     365        4     86       3    205        0     334     62    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0      96        193       950      305        1,255

  11:00-12:00            5      1      1     186     410        8     80       0    219        0     374     72    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0     108        194     1,050      306        1,356

  13:00-14:00            5      1      1     206     417        1    119       1    235        0     403     92    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0      98        223     1,119      362        1,481

  14:00-15:00            3      3      1     222     443        5     92       2    254        0     436     81    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0     104        202     1,187      355        1,542

  16:00-17:00            4      1      2     250     410        3     96       1    250        0     525    112    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0     132        358     1,300      354        1,654

  17:00-18:00            1      2      0     280     508        0    134       3    203        0     563    132    0      0    0      0    0    0    0    0     158        436     1,483      343        1,826

  8 Hour Total:         29     21      7   1,670   3,841        28   857      16   1,819       0 3,277      698    0      0    0      0    0     0    0    0    912      2,086      9,514   2,749       12,263

Comment:




Note: Volume Of All Crossing Major Street (2B) is defined As:

(i)     Left Turns From Both Minor Street Approaches
(ii)    The Heaviest Through Volume From The Minor Street
(iii)   50% Of The Heavier Left Turn Movement From Major Street When Both the Following Criteria Are Matched
        (a) The Left Turn Volume > 120 vph
        (b) The Left Turn Volume Plus The Opposing Volume > 720 vph
(iv)    Pedestrians Crossing The Major Street
(v)     Bicycle Volumes Are Included In "THRU" Movement Totals


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 1                                                    Printed On: 23 Mar, 2009 10:46:27AM
                           Appendix I
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report
Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue ­ Reconstruction
(Part Lot 28, Conc. 1 from the Bay)
City of Toronto

Class EA
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study
Final Report




FOR:
Transportation Services
City of Toronto
City Hall 22nd Floor East
100 Queen St. W.
Toronto, ON




December 4, 2009



MCL Archaeological File #: P322-011-2009


HISTORIC HORIZON INC.
601-267 St. George St. Toronto, Ontario M5R 2P9
416-944-9687 Fx: 416-964-8119
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                                                                Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                                                    City of Toronto




                                                      TABLE OF CONTENTS



Project Personnel..........................................................................................................................iii

1.0       INTRODUCTION and EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .............................................................. .1

2.0       STAGE 1 BACKGROUND STUDY ................................................................................... 2
          2.1  Site Setting ............................................................................................................ 2
          2.2  Physiographic Setting............................................................................................ 2
          2.3  Existing Archaeological Sites ................................................................................ 3
          2.4  Historical Background ........................................................................................... 3
          2.5  Analysis of Historic Maps ...................................................................................... 6
          2.6  Archaeological Potential........................................................................................ 7


3.0       SUMMARY and RECOMMENDATIONS........................................................................... 8
          3.1 Summary of Findings............................................................................................. 8
          3.2 Recommendations ............................................................................................... 9

4.0       REFERENCES................................................................................................................ 10

List of Tables
TABLE 1:       Selected Historical Chronology of the Study Area................................................. 5

List of Appendices
A: Figures ­ Historical Map Overlays
B: Photographs / Historical Images

Appendix A: Figures
Figure 1: Regional Site Location Toronto 30 M/11 NTS 1:50,000 with Mapquest inset
Figure 2: General Area of Study with Study Area Outlined
Figure 3: Overlay on Study Area of 1853 Map (Fleming)
Figure 4: Overlay on Study Area of 1858 Map (Boulton)
Figure 5: Overlay on Study Area of 1884 Map (Goad)
Figure 6: Overlay on Study Area of 1892 Map (Goad)
Figure 7: Overlay on Study Area of 1918 Map (Goad)
Figure 8: Overlay on Study Area of 1923 Map (Goad)
Figure 9: Overlay on Study Area of 1945 Map (Underwriters')

Appendix B: Historic Images and Site Photos
Photo 1: Looking west along Peel from Gladstone, 1949.
Photo 2: Looking west along Peel from Gladstone, 1951.
Photo 3: Looking east along Peel from Dufferin, 1949.
Photo 4: Looking east along Peel from Dufferin, 1951.
HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                                                                    ii
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                          Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                              City of Toronto

Photo 5: Looking north along Gladstone from halfway up, 1949.
Photo 6: Looking north along Gladstone from halfway up, 1951.
Photo 7: Looking north along Gladstone from Queen intersection, 1949.
Photo 8: Looking north along Gladstone from Queen intersection, 1951.
Photo 9: View of Dufferin at intersection with Peel.
Photo 10: Looking east along Peel from intersection with Dufferin.
Photo 11: Looking west along Peel toward Dufferin from intersection with Gladstone.
Photo 12: Looking southwest along Gladstone from intersection with Peel.
Photo 13: Looking south along Gladstone from intersection with Peel.
Photo 14: Looking northwest up Gladstone from north of Gladstone Hotel.
Photo 16: Looking northwest up Gladstone from Queen St. intersection.
Photo 17: Looking south down Gladstone to Queen St. intersection.
Photo 18: Gladstone Hotel and City of Toronto historical plaque.




HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                       iii
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                                                                       Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                                                           City of Toronto




Project Personnel

Project Manager ...............................................................................................................Heather Henderson
Principal Investigator, Site Visit, Archaeological Licence ....................................................... Meagan Brooks
Graphics .................................................................................................................................Andrew Murray
Stage 1 Research ............................................................................................................Heather Henderson
Report preparation ................................................................................Meagan Brooks, Heather Henderson




Prepared for:

City of Toronto
Transportation Services                                                           ATTN: Marillia Cimini
City Hall, 22nd Floor
100 Queen St. W.
Toronto ON                                                                       phone: 416-338-6582



Acknowledgments

Thanks to Rob Von Bitter, Archaeological Data Coordinator of the Ontario Ministry of Culture for providing
information on the registered archaeological sites in the vicinity of the study area.

Thanks to David Robertson of Archaeological Services Inc. for comments and assistance with determining
the actual location of the early military cemetery indicated on the City of Toronto Archaeological Master
Plan.




HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                                                                             iv
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                                Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                    City of Toronto



            STAGES 1 ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND STUDY REPORT
                                  Final

                        Peel and Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Class EA
                                  Part Lot 28, Lot 1 from the Bay
                                          City of Toronto



1.0     INTRODUCTION and EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

In July 2009 Historic Horizon Inc. was retained by City of Toronto Transportation Services to
conduct a Stage 1 archaeological background study of the street alignments of two blocks in the
City of Toronto, being Peel Street and the block of Gladstone Street just north of Queen St.
West (Figures 1, 2). The study area is the portion of these two streets that forms the route
currently used to detour around the railway corridor crossing at Dufferin and Queen Streets. As
the Dufferin Street and Queen Street intersection is being re-joined, Peel and Gladstone streets
are being re-adjusted to their original purpose as mainly residential streets. The archaeological
study is being carried out as part of a Municipal Class "B" EA.

Archaeological potential for this property is identified by proximity to the source of a former
stream channel on the east, and the presence of adjacent or former 19th century buildings, or
transportation routes (Figures 3 to 9). Distance to a water source is known to be a primary
factor for locating pre-contact Aboriginal sites. Post-contact Euro-Canadian sites dating to the
19th century or earlier are considered to have archaeological significance. This area at Dufferin
Street and Queen Street West was under development by the 1860s. However, the integrity of
original deposits on a property is a key consideration for determination of archaeological
potential. The Peel and Gladstone Avenue street corridor study area is estimated to contain no
archaeological integrity. Some of the yards of surrounding houses may retain some integrity of
original soil deposits.

Stage 1 work was carried out under Ministry of Culture professional archaeological licence,
project CIF # P322-011-2009. All of the study area consists of City-owned, public streets. Site
viewings were carried out on July 20 and August 26, 2009. Documentation related to the
archaeological assessment will be curated by Historic Horizon Inc. until such a time that
arrangements for ultimate transfer to the Crown in right of Ontario, or other public institution, can
be made to the satisfaction of the Ministry of Culture.

The following report has been prepared by Historic Horizon Inc. for review by the Ministry of
Culture (MCL) and the City of Toronto Heritage Preservation section of the Planning
Department as part of the Class EA. The report documents the findings and recommendations
of Stage 1 archaeological background research.




HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                                 1
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                              Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                  City of Toronto

2.0     STAGE 1 BACKGROUND STUDY

2.1     Site Conditions

The study area consists of two linking streets near the intersection of Dufferin Street, Queen
Street and one of Toronto's major railway corridors. Peel and Gladstone Avenues are lined with
a mix of domestic, industrial and commercial buildings, and currently form the detour route
linking Dufferin Street to Queen Street West (Photos 9 to 17). The latter intersection was cut off
in the late 19th century when railway tracks running obliquely through the area were re-built on a
bridge, running over Queen Street which had been lowered into a subway underpass.

Brief site viewings were carried out on July 20 and August 26, 2009 (Photos 9 to 18). Peel and
Gladstone Avenues are both wide enough for street parking on both sides of the road. Much of
the area retains the small houses, mostly of duplex or row house design, that were constructed
between the 1870s and World War I. Several 20th century structures have replaced earlier
houses on Peel Ave. and parts of Gladstone Ave. (Photos 11, 13, 14, 16), but some of the late
Victorian houses remain.

The south end of Gladstone Avenue, on both sides of the street, consists mostly of businesses,
including the Gladstone Hotel at the east corner of Queen and Gladstone. Built in 1889 and
recently restored, it is a listed historic building and has been plaqued by the City of Toronto
(Photo 18). Other businesses in the area are housed in modern 20th century buildings. Those at
the south end of Gladstone have replaced 19th century businesses on the same lots. The
streetscape is untreed with overhead wires. Construction work has begun to join Dufferin Street
to Queen Street and the area south of the intersection of Dufferin and Peel appears disturbed.

Appendix A includes the city property/street map of the study area, with several historic maps
shown overlaid on the existing street plan. Appendix B provides photos of the existing site
conditions as compared to some historic views of the area.

2.2     Physiographic Setting

This portion of Toronto is in the Iroquois Plain, an area that was once inundated by glacial Lake
Iroquois (about 12,000 B.P). The area was exposed during a later phase of lake development
and the Lake Ontario shoreline established in its 19th century position by about 3,000 years ago.
Soils in the study area are comprised of fine lacustrine silt and clay sediments overlying older
clay till deposits worn down by Iroquois wave action. The study area lies between the sand
deltas of the Don and Humber Rivers (Chapman & Putnam 1984:192). Original forests in the
area would have consisted of maple and beech with basswood, oaks and hickory.

The original Lake Ontario shoreline has been altered by 19th and 20th century infilling in the
Toronto harbour area. Similarly, a number of small creeks which once flowed into the lake have
been channelized and buried underground. The source for the Asylum Stream, a tributary of
Garrison       Creek,      lay    just      east and     south     of    the      study    area
(www.lostrivers.ca/GarrisonCreek.htm), creating part of the archaeological potential zone for
this project. Water courses of any kind indicate an increase in the potential for archaeological
sites, particularly those of Aboriginal origin.

HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                               2
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                               Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                   City of Toronto



2.3     Existing Archaeological Sites

A search of the Ontario Archaeological Site Database at the Ministry of Culture, Heritage
Operations Unit found no registered site within, or directly adjacent to, the study area, and there
are currently no registered sites within 1 kilometre of the study area.

The City of Toronto Archaeological Master plan indicates a possible early cemetery just south of
the Queen and Dufferin Streets intersection and south of the rail corridor. David Robertson of
Archaeological Services Inc. was contacted to follow up on the source of the information. He
indicated by email that a military cemetery was mentioned in J.R. Robertson's Landmarks of
Toronto. A re-reading of the source document indicated that the cemetery being referred to is
the one that is known to lie farther south by Exhibition Park, and is not near the study area. This
interpretation was confirmed with David Robertson.

2.4     Historical Background

A variety of resources were reviewed as part of the Stage 1 background study. An analysis of
historic maps was conducted to examine topography and land use history in an attempt to
determine the types and locations of former buildings or water courses (Appendix A). Individual
properties were not researched as the study area encompasses only the Peel and Gladstone
street corridors and not the surrounding modern properties. Archival sources were sought at the
City of Toronto Archives, the Metro Toronto Reference Library and the Archives of Ontario. A
chronological list of selected documentation is given in Table 1.

A series of map overlays have been prepared in order to determine the presence and patterns
of earlier buildings and subdivision plans in the study area. Overlays of historic images on the
modern survey indicate the changes to the buildings on the property over time (Figures 2 to 9).

2.4.1 Regional History
Toronto was founded in 1793 when Sir John Graves Simcoe, Lt. Governor of Upper Canada,
established a small military settlement (Fort York Garrison) and began to lay out an associated
town (then called York). By 1796, officials were ordered to move their offices from Newark (now
Niagara on the Lake) to the new colonial capital at York . The York location was selected for its
sheltered harbour, protected by the island peninsula, and its farther distance from the American
border. York expanded quickly after the War of 1812, becoming a major urban centre in Upper
Canada for industry, business, transportation and immigration. York was incorporated as the
City of Toronto in 1834, returning to its earlier aboriginal name. The study area lies in one of the
100 acre park lots surveyed north of Queen Street in the first concession.

Lot 28 lies on the extreme western edge of the established 1834 city limit. Dufferin Street was
the concession road that marked the town boundary. The general area remained undeveloped
until after the 1830s, and Dufferin Street had not even been opened through to the lake as late
as 1833 (Bonnycastle 1833 map). By mid century, development in Toronto was approaching
this area. A toll gate had been established on Queen Street West at the Dufferin intersection.
The toll house was situated on the north edge of Queen just west of the intersection, a location
that now lies under Queen Street (Figure 3).
HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                                3
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                              Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                  City of Toronto



The neighbourhood surrounding the study area grew up in the second half of the 19th century
after one of the early railway lines was routed through the southwest corner of the park lot. The
streets were lined with small attached homes and the area closer to the railway and Queen
Street included businesses, many located there because of the railway and nearby Parkdale
passenger station. The character of the businesses in the neighbourhood is no longer
associated with the train tracks, although they still pass through the area. New condo
developments are beginning to take over some of the abandoned industrial space.

2.4.2 Property History
The study area consists of the southwest corner of Lot 28, Concession 1 north of the Bay, in the
former York Township, now the City of Toronto. The original 100 acre park lot was granted to
Angus Mcdonell, and extended from Queen Street in the south to Dundas Street in the north. It
is not clear how the Mcdonell family made use of the lot prior to the beginning of subdivision,
but maps suggest it was still forested in the 1830s. This family appears to be the Mcdonells
associated with the first legislature in Upper Canada, and likely were acquiring land for
speculation.

Alexander Mcdonell inherited the property in 1819, and by 1845 had begun to subdivide the lot
at its north end along Dundas Street. Other family members continued to sell off portions of it
into the 1870s. Isolated buildings appear along Queen Street by the 1850s (Fleming 1853,
Boulton 1858: Figure 4). Their functions are unknown. The Boulton map indicates a structure in
the middle of the lot, north of the study area, which may have been a farmhouse.

By the early 1860s Gladstone Avenue had been extended south to Queen Street (Browne 1862
map) and Peel Avenue was added before 1878 (Miles & Co. 1878), indicating that the area had
been completely subdivided. Insurance maps of the 1880s show the lots adjoining the study
area streets as almost completely built up and the rail corridor appears to have expanded to its
full width (Goad 1884: Figure 5). Most of the early development appears to be modest
residential, especially in the north part, similar to the present day. The area east of the railway
corridor contained wood yards, a livery stable and later a big coal yard, all conveniently located
by the tracks.

In 1851 a portion of the southwest corner of the lot was sold to the Ontario, Simcoe and Huron
Railroad Union Co. (Abstracts to Deeds). This marks the beginning of the rail corridor running
across the corner of Queen and Dufferin. The original alignment did not impact the street
intersection, but lay northeast of it. The Grand Trunk put in a line southwest of it by 1858 and
later, an additional parallel rail line was built, eventually impacting the intersection at a level
crossing. In 1898, Queen Street was re-built in the subway underpass and Dufferin Street was
cut off at the tracks, continuing only on the south side of the rail yard. At this time, Peel and
Gladstone began to be used as the dog-leg detour around the tracks, to reach Queen Street.

In 1889, the presence of the nearby Parkdale railway station, south of Queen Street, instigated
the construction of the Gladstone Hotel on the east corner of Queen and Gladstone. Now a
plaqued historic building and recently renovated, it is the oldest continuously operating hotel in
Toronto (Photo 18).


HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                               4
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                                               Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                                   City of Toronto



  Table 1: Peel & Gladstone Avenues, Summary of Selected Historical Documentation
  Dates Events                                                   Source
  1801      Crown Patent granted to Angus McDonell for 100 acre lot. His name is              Abstracts to Deeds,
            shown on the Patent Plan.                                                         Lot 28, Conc.1, City
            He had a location ticket or petition for the park lot as of 1798.                 of Toronto and
                                                                                              Ontario Land Records
                                                                                              Index
  1819      Alexander McDonell acquires entire lot                                            Ditto, Inst. #3424
  1823      Study area still appears to be forested.                                          Phillpotts map,
                                                                                              Plan of York
  1833      Dufferin is still just a concession road and is labeled as not yet open. No       Bonnycastle map
            development in the study area
  1845      McDonell begins to subdivide the lot and continues to sell off lots for several   Ditto
            years, Purchasers of part lots include John Howard, Samuel Smith.
  1851      McDonell dies and members of the family continue to sell parts of the             Ditto, Inst. #39627
            original park lot.
  1851      First sale of part of the lot for railway right of way to the Ontario, Simcoe     Ditto, Inst. #44093
            and Huron Railroad Union Co.
  1853      Fleming map of military Reserve includes the corner of Dufferin and Queen         Fleming map [Fig.3]
            where a toll gate is located on the east side of Dufferin on Queen. A toll
            house is marked on the north edge of the road just west of the intersection.
  1856      Grand Trunk Railway construction                                                  Riddell 1991
  1858      The park lot is still almost completely unsubdivided, and marked as the           Boulton map [Fig.4]
            "McDonell Estate". Two buildings in south end on Queen St. and one much
            farther north in the middle of the lot ­ likely the estate house.
  1862      Gladstone Avenue is now on the map and subdivision has begun only in the          J.O.Browne map
            north of the lot along Dundas St.
            A single rail line is now in place running northwest to southeast across the
            southwest corner of the lot
  1877      Canadian Pacific Railway begun                                                    Riddell 1991
  1878      Peel and Gladstone Avenues are fully built. There appear to be two rail lines     Miles & Co.
            in place.                                                                         Historical Atlas of
                                                                                              York County
  1884      Lots along both Peel and Gladstone Avenues are subdivided, and most lots          Goad's Atlas [Fig.5]
            have buildings. A third? rail line has been added to the rail corridor,
            extending the width of it southwest into the Queen/Dufferin intersection.
            Dufferin is still marked as the western limit of the City of Toronto.
  1887      Polk map labels the intersection of Queen and Dufferin and the rail corridor      Polk & Co. map
            as the terminus of the Toronto Street Railway.
            The Parkdale Passenger Railway Station is also noted
  1889      Gladstone Hotel built on northwest corner of Queen and Gladstone.                 Historical plaque on
                                                                                              building
  1892      This version of Goad's insurance plans is at the best scale and contains the      Goad's Atlas
            most detail. Most buildings along Peel and Gladstone appear to be                 1880 (rev 1892)
            dwellings. The south part of the west side of Gladstone has a wood yard and       [Fig. 6]
            a livery and much of the railyard behind this area is clear of buildings.
  1898      Grade separation of rail lines and Queen Street, with construction of an
            underpass for Queen, below the rail lines
  1899      Insurance map shows three distinct railway lines and labels the Queen St.         Goad's Atlas
            subway underpass now in place.

  1918      More dwellings have been added to the south side of the west end of Peel.         Goad's Atlas 1918
            The Conger Coal Co. has built extensively in the formerly empty yards near
            the railway corridor and added a rail siding for their own use. Most other
            buildings have not changed.
  1923      Mostly the same as 1918                                                           Goads Atlas
                                                                                              1910 (rev 1923)
                                                                                              [Fig 8]
  1945      Much the same as 1923. A gas station now appears on the west corner of            Insurance Atlas 1945
            Queen and Gladstone, there is a parking lot where the livery stable stood         [Fig.9]
HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                                                5
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                                          Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                              City of Toronto

  Dates     Events                                                                       Source
            and lumber business has taken over lands north of the Gladstone Hotel.
            Street widths etc appear original.
  1951      Both Peel and Gladstone are widened and re-paved.                            City Engineer's office
                                                                                         photos (Toronto
                                                                                         Archives)
  1950s     City Planning map indicates a building has been added to the Auto parking    City of Toronto
            area on the west side of Gladstone. The lumber yard north of the Gladstone   Planning Board map
            Hotel is amalgamated as one lot ­ likely where the grocery store is now.
            Four small houses on the west side of Gladstone near the Peel intersection
            have been replaced by one building.



2.5      Analysis of Historic Maps

Several historic maps have been examined for evidence of former land use, structures and
property divisions. A selected group of these are shown in the original, with scaled overlays of
the City mapping for the full block of the study area (Figures 3 to 9). The overlays do not
always agree exactly with modern mapping or each other due to scaling problems often found
on historic maps. Additional maps were also referenced for contextual information.

The earliest map found showing any structures in the area was the 1853 Fleming, showing only
the toll gate and toll house on Queen Street at Dufferin (Figure 3). The best map for structures
in mid-19th century Toronto is the Boulton atlas. It labels Lot 28 as the McDonell Estate and
shows several small structures along Queen Street, one of which stood close to what is now the
northeast corner of Queen and Gladstone where the Gladstone Hotel now stands (Figure 4).
The overall Boulton map shows that the railway lines have been built through the
Queen/Dufferin corner, although they are absent from the study area page. No structures were
located within the Peel or Gladstone road allowances. An 1862 map indicates that Gladstone
Avenue has been extended from Dundas Street to Queen Street but that Peel Street has not yet
been built (Browne 1862 map). Peel appears on the map of Toronto in the Illustrated Historical
Atlas (Miles & Co. 1878). Peel and Gladstone appear to retain their original alignments.
Maps from this time until the 1880s are not useful for specific building information. By the
1880s, regular insurance maps were produced for the City of Toronto, showing details of lot
division and structures, including addresses. The Goad's 1884 plan shows that the north side of
Peel is filled in with small houses, as is the central part of the west side of Gladstone (Figure 5).
Some buildings are also shown along the east side of Gladstone and the south side of Peel,
most of which appear to be dwellings.

By 1892, the Goad's plan shows that one of the 1884 lots labeled R. Beatty is now a livery
stable and the northeast corner of Queen and Gladstone holds a wood yard (Figure 6). The
latter has the same buildings as the earlier Goads maps and may have been in this location for
some time. More houses have been added to the east side of Gladstone Ave. The original row
of attached houses on the west side of Gladstone is labeled "Louise Terrace". The Gladstone
Hotel has been built

The 1918 Goad's map shows considerable new construction northeast of the tracks, which are
labeled Grand Trunk and Canadian Pacific (Figure 7). The livery stable is now "J.Coulter,
Cartage Agent, and a building along Queen St. in the former wood yard is labeled "wood cutting
mill". The Conger Coal Company has taken over most of the yard by the tracks, and added a
spur siding presumably for ease of loading freight cars. Several new dwellings have been built

HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                                             6
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                              Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                  City of Toronto

on the south side of Peel St. near the Dufferin corner, and a couple of cottages have been
removed in the middle of the block to allow the coal company spur line.

By 1823, insurance mapping shows few changes to the buildings along Peel and Gladstone.
Conger Coal has removed the largest coal shed and several houses are gone from lots just
north of the Gladstone Hotel (Figure 8). By 1945, these lots are shown as "Lumber and
Carpentry Shop" and the presence of automobiles is clearly seen. The livery stable/cartage
building has become a parking lot and the former wood lot at the corner of Queen and
Gladstone now has an "Auto Service Station" (Figure 9). A block of houses is gone from the
middle of the east side of Gladstone. Buildings on the southwest corner of Peel and Gladstone
are businesses rather than houses. All other buildings appear not to have changed.

In 1950, the City widened and re-paved Peel and Gladstone Avenues between Dufferin and
Queen Streets (Photos 1 to 8). The widening replaced pavement and reduced the sizes of
adjacent lawns. Street lights were modernized

An 1950s City Planning map indicates that a large structure has been added to the parking lot
mentioned above, and the lumber and carpentry shop yard is now one large structure. Four
houses near Peel on the west side of Gladstone have been replaced with one large building,
likely the commercial building now standing. Other buildings appear unchanged.

This analysis suggests that about half of the existing buildings, most of them dwellings, along
Peel and Gladstone in the study area may be original to their lots. None of the original industrial
buildings appear to remain standing, and most of their locations have been re-built over. The
street alignments of Peel and Gladstone Avenues are original, but they have been widened and
re-paved. No former buildings stood in these street alignments.

2.6     Archaeological Potential

The determination of potential for finding archaeological sites is based on two main groups of
criteria. These involve the possibilities of any past human occupation based on known
environmental and historic factors, and secondly, the impact of later human activity on the lands
which may reduce or eliminate the integrity of the original soil deposits.

The possibilities of significant human occupation in the Peel and Gladstone study area are
based on the nearby presence of a former stream source, as well as the presence of early Euro-
Canadian settlement, 19th century buildings, and original transportation routes. The latter
include early rail lines and the early Queen Street and Dufferin Street corridors.

The Asylum stream, a tributary of Garrison Creek, was intermittent and has been buried since
the 19th century. Its former presence suggests the possibility of pre-contact Aboriginal
occupation in the general vicinity.

Lot 28 was taken up very early in Toronto's history. Usually this signals an early 19th century
settlement site. The McDonell family seem, however, to have purchased it for speculation and
did not begin to develop it until the 1840s. A significant homestead site may be unlikely.

Dufferin and Queen Streets, as early roads, would have attracted development along their
routes. The presence of a toll gate on Queen at Dufferin may have increased the possibility of
early businesses in the area, predating the Goad's insurance maps. This location is now under
HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                               7
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                              Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                  City of Toronto

Queen Street and if not removed by road paving, would have been destroyed by the underpass
construction. It is not within the Peel or Gladstone Street corridor study area.

The railway corridor, begun in the 1850s, attracted a number of businesses and industries,
including a passenger station south of Queen Street. However, the tracks are still in use and
have been upgraded often. Original track beds or adjacent railway structures are unlikely.
Neither the tracks nor any of the 19th century industrial/commercial structures lie within the Peel
or Gladstone road alignments.

Other significant early structures would include pre-1870s dwellings and businesses, industries
or institutions of the 19th or early 20th centuries. Since Gladstone and Peel were not built until
the 1860s and 1870s, none of the dwellings adjacent to these streets would be considered
significant. The yard around Gladstone Hotel may contain archaeologically significant deposits,
but it does not appear to have extended under the current Gladstone Street alignment. There do
not appear, however, to have been any known 19th century structures within the Peel or
Gladstone Avenue road alignments.

The study area appears to retain very little site integrity. Although the yards around the original
19th century dwellings may retain some original deposits, the street corridors themselves have
been paved several times and widened in 1950 (Photos 1 to 8). These activities, with
associated drains and service installations, would have caused deep disturbance, removing any
original soil deposits.

As a result, it is recommended that the street alignments of Peel and Gladstone Avenues be
cleared of archaeological concerns.


3.0     SUMMARY and RECOMMENDATIONS

3.1     Summary of Findings

The area of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue between Dufferin Street and Queen Street
West, originally part of park Lot 28, Concession 1, York Twp. has been subjected to a Stage 1
archaeological background study. The Stage 1 study, carried out in summer 2009, included site
viewings on July 20 and August 26. The study area was situated northwest of the source of the
former Asylum Stream of Garrison Creek, increasing its potential for pre-contact archaeological
sites. The area was being developed by at the third quarter of the 19th century in association
with the nearby railway corridor and the thoroughfares of Queen and Dufferin Streets. Almost all
buildings that are known to have existed in this area were constructed along the sides of Peel
and Gladstone Avenues after the streets were built. The few that pre-date the construction of
the street pattern do not appear to have been situated within the street corridors. The streets
themselves have been subjected to several re-pavings and were widened in 1950. The area is
also underlain by sewers and other utilities, placed in deep trenches.

No sites previously registered with the Archaeological Database of the Ontario Ministry of
Culture were found to lie within or adjacent to the study area.


HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                               8
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                             Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                 City of Toronto

These findings indicate that the street corridors of Peel Avenue and Gladstone Avenue in the
study area do not appear to retain archaeological integrity. As a result, the study area does not
carry the potential for significant archaeological resources.

3.2     Recommendations

The following recommendations are made regarding further archaeological work on the
property.

1.      It is recommended that the street allowances, including the sidewalks, of Peel Avenue
        from Dufferin Street to Gladstone Avenue, and Gladstone Avenue from Peel to Queen
        Street West be cleared of archaeological concerns.


3.2.1 Advisory Statements on Compliance with Legislation
The Ontario Ministry of Culture requires that the following statements be included in every
archaeological report (Standard and Guidelines of Consultant Archaeologists, Draft, 2006).

2.      This report is filed with the Ministry of Culture in compliance with section 65(1) of the
        Ontario Heritage Act. The ministry reviews reports to ensure that the licensee has met
        the terms and conditions of the licence and archaeological resources have been
        identified and documented according to the standards and guidelines set by the ministry,
        ensuring the conservation, protection and preservation of the heritage of Ontario. It is
        recommended that development not proceed before receiving confirmation that the
        Ministry of Culture has entered the report into the provincial register of reports.

3.      Should previously unknown or unassessed deeply buried archaeological resources be
        uncovered during construction activities, they may be a new archaeological site and
        therefore subject to Section 48(1) of the Ontario Heritage Act. The proponent or person
        discovering the archaeological resources must cease alteration of the site immediately
        and engage a licensed archaeologist to carry out archaeological fieldwork, in compliance
        with Sect. 48(1) of the Ontario Heritage Act. The Ministry of Culture (MCL) should be
        notified immediately (416-314-7146).

4.      Any person discovering human remains must immediately notify the police or coroner
        and the Registrar of the Cemeteries Regulation Unit of the Ministry of Government
        Services (416-326-8404).




HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                              9
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                                               Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                                   City of Toronto



4.0      REFERENCES

Primary Sources

NTS Topographic Map 1:50,000          Toronto 30 M/11 Edition 7, 1985 (NAD 1927)

City of Toronto Archives
1950s City of Toronto Planning Board Map

City Engineer's Office - Street Photographs
         Negative #'s       # 1880 ­ Mar.23-49 Gladstone Ave.
                            # 1881 ­ Mar.23-49 Gladstone Ave.
                            # 1884 ­ Mar.23-49 Peel Ave.
                            # 1885 ­ Mar.23-49 Peel Ave.
                            # 2122 ­ Mar.12-51 Gladstone Ave.
                            # 2123 ­ Mar.12-51 Gladstone Ave.
                            # 2124 ­ Mar.12-51 Peel Ave.
                            # 2125 ­ Mar.12-51 Peel Ave.

Ontario Ministry of Culture
Ontario Archaeological Sites Database

Archives of Ontario
Index to Ontario Crown Land Records
Abstract to Deeds - Roll # GSU 197272                    Lot 28, Concession 1, York Township

Metro Toronto Reference Library
Maps & Plans

Bonnycastle, R.H.
1833   Plan of the Town and Harbour of York, U.C.

Fleming, Sanford
1853     Toronto Plan shewing [sic] the Boundaries as marked on the ground of the Military Reserve belonging to the
         Odnance in the City of Toronto...between... Nov'r 1851 & Nay 1852.

Boulton, W.S.& H.C.
1858     Atlas Plan of Toronto. J. Ellis publisher, Toronto.

Browne, H.J.
1862    Plan of the City of Toronto Showing the Government Survey & the Registered Subdivision into Lots
        according to Plans filed in the Office of the Registrar

Miles & Co.
1878     Illustrated Historical Atlas of the County of York.

R.L Polk & Co.
1887     City of Toronto. Toronto.

Goad, Charles E.
1884    Goad's (Fire Insurance) Atlas of the City of Toronto and Vicinity. C.Goad, Toronto.
1892    Goad's (Fire Insurance) Atlas of the City of Toronto and Suburbs. C.Goad, Toronto.
1899    Goad's Atlas of the City of Toronto. Toronto
1918    Goad's Atlas of the City of Toronto. Toronto
1923    Goad's Atlas of the City of Toronto. Toronto

HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                                              10
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                                             Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                                                 City of Toronto


Canadian Underwriter's Association
1945    Insurance Plan of the City of Toronto. Underwriter's Survey Bureau Ltd., Toronto


Secondary Sources

Archaeological Services Inc. (ASI)
2004    A Master Plan of Archaeological Resources for the City of Toronto - Interim Report. Prepared for Heritage
        Preservation Services, City of Toronto.

Chapman, L.J., and D.F. Putnam
1984  The Physiography of Southern Ontario. Ontario Geological Survey Special Volume 2, Ministry of Natural
      Resources.

Hayes, Derek
2008    Historical Atlas of Toronto. Douglas & MacIntyre, Toronto.

MapArt
1998   Toronto and Area, map book. MapArt Publishing Ltd., Oshawa.

Miles and Co.
1878     The Illustrated Historical Atlas of the County of York. Toronto.

Ontario Ministry of Culture (MCL)
1993     Archaeological Assessment Technical Guidelines, Stages 1-3.
2009     Standards and Guidelines for Consultant Archaeologists. Draft.

Riddell, John
1991      The Railways of Toronto: The First 100 Years. Vol. 1. British Railway Modelers of North America.

Robertson, John Ross
1894    Landmarks of Toronto, Vol.1. Pg.66.



Websites
www.lostrivers.ca
www.trha.ca
www.torontohistory.org




HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                                            11
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto            Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                City of Toronto




                                             APPENDIX A:

                                                 Figures




HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                           12
   NTS 1:50,000, Toronto 30 M/11




                 Study Area




                                   Dufferin




                        Study Area
                                              Rail
                                                     Cor
                                                        rido
                                                            r




MapArt

                                                       Peel / Gladstone Avenues, Reconstruction
                                                       Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study

                                                       Figure 1: Regional Site Location
                                                             Gladstone
                                                             Hotel

Queen St. underpass
                                   Ra
                                    il
                                    Co
                                         rri
                                          do
                                               rs




         Study Area:                           Peel / Gladstone Avenues, Class EA
         Recommended                           Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study
         Clear of Archaeological
         Concerns                              Figure 2: General Area of Study (City mapping)
                                               with specific Study Area outlined
                    N STREET
              DUFFERI
              DUFFERIN STREET




                                    PEEL STREET




                                                                       GL
                                                                           GLADSTONE AVENUE
                                                                         ADSTONE AVENUE




                                                   QUEEN STREET WEST
                                                                                              QUEEN STREET




                                Peel / Gladstone Avenues, Class EA
      0      25m                Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study

HISTORIC HORIZON INC.           Figure 3: Overlay on Study Area of 1853 Map.(Fleming 1853)
                                        ALMA AVENUE




              DUFFERIN STREET




                                    PEEL STREET




                                                                          GLADSTONE AVENUE




                                                      QUEEN STREET WEST




                                Peel / Gladstone Avenues, Class EA
      0      25m                Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study

HISTORIC HORIZON INC.           Figure 4: Overlay of Study Area of 1858 Map (Boulton, 1858)
                               ALMA AVENUE




                    N STREET
              DUFFERI




                                                                      GLADSTONE AVENUE




                                                                                         QUEEN STREET




                                 Peel / Gladstone Avenues, Class EA
      0      25m                 Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study

HISTORIC HORIZON INC.            Figure 5: Overlay on Study Area of 1884 Map (Goad 1884)
                                                           ALMA AVENUE




                                  DUFFERIN STREET




          R
              R
                  Tr
                     a   ck
                              s




                                                                         QUEEN STREET WEST




                                                    Peel / Gladstone Avenues, Class EA
      0                           25m               Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study

HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                               Figure 6: Overlay on Study Area of 1892 Map (Goad 1892)
                               ALMA AVENUE




                        Peel / Gladstone Avenues, Class EA
      0      25m        Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study

HISTORIC HORIZON INC.   Figure 7: Overlay on Study Area of 1918 Map (Goad 1918)
                                        ALMA AVENUE




              DUFFERIN STREET




                                                      QUEEN STREET WEST




                                Peel / Gladstone Avenues, Class EA
      0      25m                Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study

HISTORIC HORIZON INC.           Figure 8: Overlay of Study Area of 1923 Map (Goad 1923)
                                ALMA AVENUE




                        Peel / Gladstone Avenues, Class EA
      0      25m        Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study

HISTORIC HORIZON INC.   Figure 9: Overlay of Study Area on 1945 Map (Underwriter's 1945)
Peel / Gladstone Street Reconstruction, Toronto                  Transportation Services
Stage 1 Archaeological Background Study Report for EA                      City of Toronto




                                             APPENDIX B:

                               Photographs / Historical Images




HISTORIC HORIZON INC.                                                                 13
Peel & Gladstone Avenues, Stage 1 Background Study                             Dufferin/Queen Re-alignment




 Photo 1:                                             Photo 2:
 Looking west along Peel Ave. from Gladstone,1949.    Looking west along Peel Ave. from Gladstone, 1951,
 (TA coll'n)                                          after street widening. (TA coll'n).




     Photo 3:                                         Photo 4:
     Looking east along Peel Ave. from Dufferin St.   Looking west along Peel Ave. from Dufferin, 1951 after
     intersection, 1949 (TA coll'n)                   street widening. (TA coll'n).



      HISTORIC HORIZON INC.
Peel & Gladstone Avenues, Stage 1 Background Study                                  Dufferin/Queen Re-alignment




Photo 5:
Looking north along Gladstone Ave. from halfway up,1949.   Photo 6:
Note intersection with Peel Ave. in near distance.         Looking north along Gladstone Ave from halfway up, 1951,
(TA coll'n)                                                after street widening. (TA coll'n).




     Photo 7:                                              Photo 8:
     Looking north along Gladstone Ave. from Queen St.     Looking north along Gladstone Ave. from Queen,1951 after
     intersection, 1949. Note Gladstone hotel on right.    street widening. (TA coll'n).
      (TA coll'n)


      HISTORIC HORIZON INC.
Peel & Gladstone Avenues, Stage 1 Background Study                                            Dufferin/Queen Re-alignment




                                                     HISTORIC HORIZON INC.




                                                                             Photo 9 (above):
                                                                             View of Dufferin St. at intersection with Peel
                                                                             Ave. Looking south along Dufferin.




                                                                             Photo 10: Looking east along Peel Ave. from
                                                                             intersection with Dufferin.




                                                                             Photo 11 (below):
                                                                             Looking west along Peel Ave. toward Dufferin,
                                                                             from intersection with Gladstone Ave.




     HISTORIC HORIZON INC.
Peel & Gladstone Avenues, Stage 1 Background Study                                    Dufferin/Queen Re-alignment




     Photo 12: Looking southeast along Gladstone from        Photo 13: Looking south along Gladstone from
     intersection with Peel.                                 intersection with Peel




                       Photo 14: Looking northwest up Gladstone from north of Gladstone Hotel.




                       Photo 16: Looking northwest up Gladstone from Queen St. intersection.


     HISTORIC HORIZON INC.
Peel & Gladstone Avenues, Stage 1 Background Study                                     Dufferin/Queen Re-alignment




                 Photo 17: Looking south down Gladstone to Queen St. intersection. Gladstone Hotel on left.




     Photo 18:
     Gladstone Hotel and City of Toronto
     historical Plaque (www.torontohistory.org).




     HISTORIC HORIZON INC.
  Appendix J
Alternatives Developed
Alternative 1
Alternative 2
Alternative 3
Alternative 4
Alternative 5
Appendix K
  Evaluation Table
Evaluation Table
Evaluation Table (Continued)
     Appendix L
Refined Preferred Solution
Refined Preferred Solution
Appendix M
Recommended Solution
Recommended Solution
         Appendix N
Refined Recommended Solution
                 Refined Recommended Solution




No. 11 Peel
 Avenue




               Price
              Chopper
